In the year 1618, the Castilian
Spaniard Garcia de Silva y Figueroa
was traveling through the heartlands of
Persia in what is today Iran. By then,
Figueroa was about sixty-one years of
age, a venerable statesman who
had set out from Spain four years earlier
as an ambassador from King Philip III.
His mission was to meet with the Shah of
the Safavid Persian Empire, flatter and
befriend him, and encourage him to go to war
with their common rival, the Ottoman Empire.
But Figueroa's embassy got off to a bad start.
When he arrived at the Shah's court, the Persian
ruler tried to entertain his guest with a display
of dancing girls, but the aging and pious Spaniard
was unimpressed. Figueroa later wrote about
what happened in his ambassador's report.
The king then told all those present that the
Spanish ambassador, because of his advanced age,
did not like watching dancing girls, and
turning to the ambassador, he said, “It's
no good trying to deceive us, leading us
to believe that it is due to your virtue,
when we know that the real reason is the
impotence of your advanced age.” At this,
he and the other two ambassadors
burst into laughter.
Now that he was an object of ridicule, Figueroa's
diplomatic aims would also come to nothing,
and he soon left the Shah's court,
despondent, with his mission in ruins.
The old Spaniard set out on the journey home,
but on his way, he consoled himself by taking
in some of the sights of the lands of Persia.
Traveling through the mountainous region of
the Iranian plateau, he and his guides enjoyed the
fruitful lands still watered by ancient aqueducts.
They praise the many palm trees and fruit orchards
that are irrigated with that good water for their
beauty and pleasant appearance, especially the
many orange and lemon trees, which produced sweet
lemons. These can be compared to the other ones
from Valencia, Spain. In fact, they may even be
better. It was while traveling through
this pleasant region known as the Marv Dasht
Plateau, along the main road between Isfahan and
Shiraz, that his guides recommended they stop at a
place that was surrounded by folklore, myths, and
mystery. It was a site they called Chehel Minar,
which in Persian means ‘the forty pillars’.
As they approached and Figueroa caught a
glimpse of it in the mouth of a wide valley,
he would have found out why. On the horizon
were the towering shapes of a great number of
massive stone columns reaching up into the sky.
After crossing the river Bramir, we traveled
through a beautiful valley, where the river fed
many streams and ditches. Many populated villages
and large herds of cattle of all kinds could be
seen. Finally, from a distance, we could see the
highest of the columns or minarets of Chehel
Minar, only visible through a thick forest
of orchards at the foot of a tall mountain.
As they drew nearer, they caught sight of what
lay ahead of them; a sprawling mass of impressive
ruins carved from massive blocks of black stone.
After the ambassador had eaten and rested, he
was filled with the desire to see this famous
and great structure that was so worthy of
examination and study, not only because
of its antiquity, but also because of
its stupendous and magnificent size,
especially since no one else had ever
written the kind of accurate and erudite
description it deserved. For much
of that afternoon, Figueroa explored the
ruins of this once grand city, which must
have been built to a staggering scale.
A very thick wall made of square
stones enclosed a large area at the
foot of the mountain. It was of marvelous
dimensions, standing over two pikes tall,
having been constructed with admirable
symmetry and beautiful proportions. There
were forty-eight standing columns in all. Some of
them were seen to be broken and partially buried
in the ground, and big pieces of others
were spread around all over the plain.
Although much of what remained was a
crumbling mass of shattered stone and brick,
in other places he was astonished to see how
well the structures had stood the test of time.
We climbed both stairways to find a portico
or entrance supported by two huge horses that
were constructed from white marble, each
of them bigger than a large elephant, with
enormous wings and leonine ferocity.
The stairway as a whole seemed to have
been finished just yesterday. This great
and wonderful structure, for incalculable
centuries, had resisted the ravages of time,
which erodes and consumes all things.
In places, the polished stone was still so fine
that it even caused some confusion to one
particular member of their expedition.
The lower sections were set with slabs of black
stone that were so burnished and polished that
anyone who stepped close to it could see his
reflection. It happened that the ambassador's
dog saw its own reflection in the inner surface.
It began snarling and showing his teeth, and
since its shadow and reflection performed the same
actions, it attacked with great impetus and fury,
attempting to bite the slab and rising up on its
hind legs, much to the mirth of those present.
Figueroa was a great reader of classical
history, and felt sure that he knew what
this once great city had been. It was
the fabled Persian capital of Persepolis.
After closely observing the location of its
beautiful and fertile countryside and the
proximity of the ancient Araxes River, not only
was there no doubt that this was once the site of
the great and celebrated Persepolis, but anyone who
sees the superb and magnificent monuments of such
ancient majesty can declare it to be such with
certainty. For its antiquity and the grandeur of
its perfection and the imperishability
of the material of which it is built,
Persepolis is incomparable to any of the other
wonders that antiquity has bequeath to us.
Figueroa's letter home about his journey would
be the first written account to accurately
identify the ruins of Chehel Minar as the
ancient Persian capital. For centuries,
this city had stood at the heart of what was at
the time the largest empire the world had ever
seen, the empire known today as the Achaemenid,
or simply Persian Empire. It was a power that
had ruled over a vast territory nearly the
size of the United States today, and brought
countless different cultures together within
its borders. But for nearly two millennia, the
ruins of Persepolis had stood alone in the rocky
highlands, now a mystery wreathed with folklore and
legend, the names of its builders forgotten,
and with no one left to tell their story.
My name is Paul Cooper, and you're listening
to the Fall of Civilizations podcast.
Each episode I look at a civilization of the
past that rose to glory and then collapsed
into the ashes of history. I want to ask,
what did they have in common? What led to
their fall, and what did it feel like to be
a person alive at the time who witnessed the
end of their world? In this episode, I want to
tell the story of the Achaemenid Persian Empire.
I want to show how this remarkable ancient power
sprung up from the rubble of a ruined world to
become the most powerful human society on earth.
I want to show how they raised their grand palaces
and monuments, and brought an unprecedented
number of people together within their borders. I want
to show how they came into conflict and cooperation
with other ancient peoples, and finally, I want to
show what happened to bring the palaces of the
Persian kings crashing down in fire and flame.
The story of Persia begins in the ashes of
the old world, the world left behind by the
Assyrian Empire. As we saw in our 13th episode,
for much of the second and first millennia BC,
the Assyrian Empire had been one of
the great powers of the ancient world.
They had sprung up in the northern reaches
of the river Tigris in Mesopotamia in what
is now northern Iraq and Kurdistan, and from
there had expanded their military might to
eclipse all others. Assyria had ruled the region
of Mesopotamia aided by its massive armies, which
were equipped with iron weapons and armor,
and crushed all resistance to their empire.
In 729 BC, the Assyrians were powerful enough
to finally conquer their greatest rival,
the largest and most powerful city in
the southern marshlands of Mesopotamia,
the city of Babylon, where our story begins.
Babylon was at that time the world's greatest
metropolis. Since its founding more than a
thousand years earlier, it had grown to become
the largest city in the world at two points in its
history, and was probably the first city to have
a population above 200,000 people. The great city
of Babylon was now absorbed into the Assyrian
Empire, but it would always be a difficult and
rebellious subject. Its people were proud, and
belonged to an ancient lineage of independent
kings. The Babylonians spoke their own dialect,
and their god named Marduk rivaled the Assyrian
deities in prominence. This meant that throughout
the occupation of their city, Babylon's rulers
were always looking for their chance to rise up
and throw off the yoke of their Assyrian masters.
There was a time when the might of Assyria must
have looked completely unbeatable, but when the
fall of Assyria came, it came all at once as
a thunderclap, and it was the city of Babylon
that proved instrumental in its collapse. After
the death of the last great king of Assyria,
Ashurbanipal, a period of weak kings and
civil wars followed, and during this time,
all of Assyria's enemies took the
opportunity to unite against it. In
the south, the Babylonians finally saw
their moment. They rebelled, and crowned
a man named Nabopolassar as the new king of an
independent Babylon, as one chronicle recalls.
On the 26th day of Arahsamna, Nabopolassar sat
on the throne in Babylon. This was the
beginning of the reign of Nabopolassar.
The Assyrians had dealt with Babylonian rebellions
before, but this time would be different. Now the
rebelling Babylonians were joined by a number of
powerful allies. Chief among these were a hardy
horse rearing people known as the Medes, who lived in
the mountains and high plains of what is now Iran.
In the year 615 BC, while Assyria was
trying to contain the Babylonian revolt,
the Medes swept down into the river
plains of the Assyrian Empire,
raiding and ravaging as they went. The
Assyrians were now fighting a war on two
fronts against two very different enemies, and
their mighty edifice began rapidly to crumble.
One Babylonian carved stele, dated
around the middle of the 6th century
BC, records this alliance of Babylon and
the Medes, who they refer to with the name
Umman-manda, a name that evokes a
terrifying horde sent by the gods.
The god Marduk provided
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon,
with help, and gave him a companion for
himself. The king of the Umman-manda,
who has no rival, he caused to
come to his aid. Above and below,
from right and left, the Umman-manda swept like
a flood storm, avenging Babylon in retaliation.
The Medes rode swiftly across the land, and
overwhelmed the Assyrian forces. One by one,
they besieged and captured each of
the great Assyrian cities that for
centuries had swelled with
the wealth of their empire.
Many of Assyria's cities were destroyed
so utterly that they would never return
as centers of population; the bodies of
their hopeless defenders left to rot in
the streets and buried beneath fallen masonry,
their bones left to be covered by the sands.
This event, the collapse of the Assyrian
Empire, was one of the swiftest and most
dramatic rearrangements of power in world
history. The largest empire on Earth had
been toppled in only about three years, and
in its wake, it left a yawning chasm.
In dividing up the territory of
Assyria and the lands beyond,
the Medes and the Babylonians mostly
stuck to what they knew best.
Like the Assyrians, the Babylonians were a settled
people who lived in villages, towns, and walled
cities, with sophisticated art, technology, and an
advanced understanding of mathematics and writing.
They fielded large infantry armies fed from
fields watered by complex irrigation systems,
where they grew barley, wheat, and fruit
orchards. They were masters of trade, and
their grand cities were resplendent, with goods
brought from all over the Eurasian landmass,
carried up and down the rivers Tigris
and Euphrates on barges. For this reason,
they happily swept north and captured many of
the Assyrian cities that still remained after
the destruction that the Medes left behind. These
they absorbed into a new Babylonian Empire that
in size, geography, and structure looked very
much like the Assyrian Empire it had replaced.
But the rocky mountains to the north
and East, they left to the hardy Medes.
The Medes were in fact only one of countless
peoples who had lived for millennia in the rocky
highlands of Iran's Zagros Mountains.
Beginning around 100 million years ago,
the Arabian tectonic plate began driving
northwards into the Eurasian Plate, and
over the next tens of millions of years,
the constant pressure bent and buckled
the land of the Eurasian side in what
geologists call a fold and thrust zone.
Today, this landscape is known as the
Iranian plateau. At its southern edge,
it looks like a piece of rumpled fabric,
a series of alternating mountain ridges and deep
valleys that are known as the Zagros Mountains.
The region of the South Zagros would become
known as Pars, and it is from this word that the
name Persia would derive. In the late 4th century
BC, the Greek historian Hieronymus of Cardia wrote
the following description of the landscape
of Persia. High land, blessed with a healthy
climate and full of the fruits appropriate to
the season. There were glens heavily wooded
and shady cultivated trees of various kinds in
parks, and also naturally converging glades and
hills of trees of every sort, and streams
of water, so that travelers lingered with
delight in places pleasantly inviting repose. Also,
there was an abundance of cattle of every kind.
Through these mountains cut an ancient and
well-used highway later known as the Khorasan
Road. The word Khorasan means ‘sunrise’, since this
highway led to the East and the regions where the
sun rose, and ultimately to the vast deserts
and arid grasslands of the Eurasian Steppe. As
it would be for much of human history, the steppe
was then home to great numbers of nomadic horse-
-riding peoples who lived by herding cattle and
other animals, and moving from place to place
to find ever newer pastures. Over the millennia,
countless different peoples had passed along it,
moving out of the great steppe and into
the shady valleys of Northern Iran.
The first known of these people arrived more than
4,000 years ago, and called themselves the Ariya,
a word that in old Iranian languages likely meant
‘noble’ or ‘lord’. They came from a vast area of
Central Asia known in Sanskrit as Aaryaavarta, or ‘the
home of the Ariyan people’. Today, the word Ariyan still
forms the etymological root of the modern name
of the nation today, Iran. Alongside these Ariya
came further waves of migrations from the steppe
into the sheltered hills and valleys of Persia.
While much of the interior of Iran is
characterized by vast sand dune deserts,
the mountainous regions along the Caspian
Sea are exceedingly green, forested with oak,
and many of the highland plateaus are
well watered and lined with poplar trees.
Alongside these Ariya came further waves of
migration into these sheltered hills and valleys.
As a group, these people are today referred
to as the Proto-Iranians, and they spoke
many different related Iranian languages.
Among them, Old Avestan, one of the oldest
preserved languages in the Indo-European family.
Because this is the same family as English,
we can actually find a lot of linguistic
similarity with our own language. For instance,
the old Avestan word for daughter is ‘dugedar’. Mother
was ‘maater’, and their word for brother was ‘brater’.
These Proto-Iranians settled all over Central
Asia, from Afghanistan and Pakistan to the hills
of Iran, and everywhere they went they
developed a wide range of cultures, all
speaking related languages. Among these
people were the Bahtrees or Bactrians,
the Sugoda or Sogdians, the
Parthava or Parthians,
and importantly for our story, in the west of
the Iranian plateau appeared the Maada, or Medes.
While the Babylonians were a centralized and
stratified kingdom, with a king at the top,
officials beneath, and priests and
administrators running the empire,
the Medes were likely more of a loose collection of
tribes bound together in a system of alliances,
blood oaths, and relationships of marriage.
Assyrian records particularly mention the
skill of the Medes in horseback riding, and Assyrian
sources always mention with pride the many fine
horses they seized whenever they raided the Median
lands, as this inscription by the Assyrian King
Tiglath-Pileser III shows. In my ninth regal year,
I ordered my armies to march against the Medes.
I conquered their cities, defeated them,
and took their spoil: 130 horses from
Bit Ishtar and its districts; 120 horses from
the cities of Gini-zinanu, Sadbat, Sisad; 100
horses from Upash of Bit Kapsi, 100 horses of Ushru
of Nikisi, 100 horses at Ugsatar and Bardada.
The Assyrians had long put down the Medes with these
kinds of raids, but now with the Assyrian Empire
fallen, the Medes were free to expand. They had
been living and thriving in the mountains for
centuries, and so, while the Babylonians took the
fertile riverlands of Mesopotamia, the Medes had
free reign over the hills and mountains in a broad
stretch of what is now Iran, Azerbaijan, Syria,
and Turkey. It's not clear the exact geographic
bounds of their empire or how centralized it ever
was, but of all the peoples of the region, they
were the greatest rival to the power of Babylon.
So, this is the world as we begin our story.
In the fertile lowlands of Mesopotamia, the
new Babylonian Empire was just beginning to find
its feet as an imperial power, and in the rocky
mountains to the north and east were the loose
tribal confederation of the horse-rearing Medes.
This was a world of new and fragile powers;
unstable, uncertain, and now increasingly
paranoid, but for the right man, it could also be
a world for the taking. It was into this landscape,
around the year 600 BC, that a man was born who
would shake up this fragile equilibrium and change
the course of history. His name in Old Persian
was Kuurush, but he has gone down in history by
the name given to him by the Greeks, Cyrus, and
he would come to be known as Cyrus the Great.
Cyrus or Kuurush was born into a family that
ruled the province of Anshan in the Zagros
Mountains in southwestern Iran. The province
was centered around the ancient city of Anshan,
which had once been the original homeland of
the people of Elam, an old and powerful society.
But Elam had been all but destroyed by the
Assyrian Empire in a cataclysmic war only
fifty years or so earlier, as one tablet written
by the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal describes.
The great holy city, abode of their gods,
seat of their mysteries, I conquered. I
entered its palaces. I destroyed the ziggurat. I
smashed its shining copper horns. I reduced the
temples of Elam to naught. Their gods and goddesses
I scattered to the winds. After this destruction,
what had once been a united Elamite kingdom
fractured. Now the city of Anshan stood in a
state of ruin, its population much reduced from
its former glory. Into this wasted land, sometime
over the preceding century, a number of nomadic
Iranian peoples had migrated from the north.
They were cultural and linguistic cousins
to the Medes, and agreed to swear allegiance
to the Median king, likely offering to
pay him tribute and fight for him in
times of war. Archaeology shows them living
a semi-nomadic lifestyle among the ruins,
pitching their tents among the fallen columns and
crumbling brick walls of the old Elamite capital.
Since their arrival, these Iranian peoples
intermarried and merged with what remained
of the local Elamites, adopting some of
their ancient dress and customs, and there
they formed a new hybrid culture, one that
was half nomadic and half belonging to the
ancient devastated civilization of Elam.
The three major tribes that made up these
people were the Maspiya, the Marafiyah, and the
Parsagad. These were the people that today we
call the Persians, and it was into this
society that the baby boy Cyrus was born.
It's worth pausing here and mentioning that we
know very little for sure about the early life
of Cyrus. His is a childhood that
is wreathed in myth and mystery.
That's because for much of the more than two
millennia since the Persian Empire flourished,
their story has been told largely by
another people, a people who at times
admired and emulated them, and at others hated
and feared them, and against whom they fought
many bitter wars. These were the people who
lived in the rocky islands and mountainous
mainlands where the Mediterranean meets
the Black Sea, the Greeks, and one Greek in
particular who has been given the name the
Father of History. His name was Herodotus.
Herodotus was born in the city of Halicarnassus, now
the Turkish port town of Bodrum, around the year
485 BC, more than a hundred years after the birth of
Cyrus the Great. He was a Greek, but this wasn't
at all a simple identity. Greece was at that
time divided between clusters of about a thousand
independent city-states, speaking dialects
including Ionian, Dorian, Attic and Aeolian,
and all constantly warring amongst themselves.
The writer Plato famously describes the Greek
cities like so. The earth is very large, and we
who dwell between the pillars of Hercules and
the river Phasis live in a small part of it around
the sea, like ants or frogs about a pond. But these
cities were united by a shared culture, language,
and reverence for a shared pantheon of gods.
When he reached the age of about thirty, Herodotus
felt a calling to travel. Around the year 454 BC,
he set out from his home of Halicarnassus and
traveled to Egypt and Libya, then through
Palestine to the Phoenician city of Tyre, and after
that, down the river Euphrates, possibly as far as
Babylon. Everywhere he went, he asked people
what they knew of the past of their region,
and he wrote down everything he saw and heard
as he went. These accounts he compiled into
nine books he called Historiai, which in ancient
Greek meant ‘researches’ or ‘inquiries’, but is the
origin of our word ‘history’. In the introduction to
his work, Herodotus explains what motivated him.
Herodotus of Halicarnassus hereby publishes
the results of his inquiries,
hoping to do two things; to preserve
the memory of the past by putting on
record the astonishing achievements
both of the Greek and the non-Greek
peoples, and more particularly to show
how the two races came into conflict.
There was no publishing industry in ancient
Greece, no printing press or mass production
of books, and so, Herodotus wrote his work to
be read aloud to audiences of citizens, often
at popular festivals. One account by the
writer Lucian claims that Herodotus first
debuted his histories by reading them aloud
at the Olympic games to a rapt audience.
The great Olympian games were at
hand, and Herodotus thought this
the opportunity he had been hoping for. He
waited for a packed audience to assemble,
one containing the most eminent men from all
Greece. He appeared in the temple chamber,
presenting himself as a competitor for an
Olympic honor. Then he recited his histories,
and so bewitched his audience that his books were
called after the muses, for they, too, were nine in
number. By this time, he was much better known
than the Olympic victors themselves. He had
only to appear, and he was pointed out; “That is that
Herodotus who wrote the tale of the Persian Wars.”
Perhaps due to this need to captivate a crowd,
Herodotus was a writer who brought his stories
to life in vivid color, full of dramatic
characters, strange lands, gory murders,
dream visions and prophecies, and
sometimes fantastical creatures.
Even for some ancient Greeks, Herodotus' wild
tales went too far. Plutarch would later write
a blistering essay entitled On the Malice of
Herodotus, tearing apart much of his histories,
and the writer Ctesias, himself also a source
on the Persian Empire, supposedly rubbished
many of Herodotus' claims, too, as related by the
chronicler Photius. He differs almost entirely
from Herodotus, whom he accuses of falsehood in
many passages, and calls an inventor of fables.
But historians generally consider Ctesias even
less reliable than Herodotus. Even worse still
is Xenophon's biography of Cyrus the Great, titled
Cyropaedia, which is best described as a piece
of fanfiction, in which the Greek soldier and
writer uses Cyrus as a blank slate onto which
he can project a fictional version of an
idealized king. But for better or worse,
for many of the events that follow, Herodotus
is the only source we have available.
That's because in the light of history, the
Persians themselves are all but silent. The
Persians never wrote down the kind of narrative
histories that made Herodotus famous. For learning
about their past, they relied on a cast
of oral storytellers or singers who would
regale their people with stories of the old
times, as the Greek writer Strabo records.
As teachers of learning, they use the wisest
men who weave in legends in order to make it
useful. Both with and without song, they recite
the deeds of the gods and the noblest men.
Just like Herodotus, these tales were designed
to be read out loud to an audience, but instead
of writing them down, their storytellers
simply remembered them using astonishing
feats of memory. These tales they would have
passed on to one another by word of mouth, so
long as the tradition of storytellers continued,
but for this reason, the Persians are not able to
tell their own story in the light of history.
The historian Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones puts the
dilemma for historians bluntly. We cannot believe
much of what Herodotus says, and yet we cannot
do without him. Some historical truths about
the Persians may well lie hidden in Herodotus,
but one needs to dig deep through the
layers of fantasy and fiction to find them.
In the end, trying to glean the truth
about this very ancient past can feel
like exploring the depths of the deep
ocean, where a single beam of light might
illuminate a whole ecosystem or an
undiscovered species living down
in the depths, but elsewhere in all
directions, there is only darkness.
Like many momentous figures of this time, such
fantasy and fiction completely shrouds the early
life of Cyrus the Great. What we know for sure
is that Cyrus was born into a royal family.
He was the son of a Persian ruler named
King Cambyses I of Anshan and possibly
his wife Mandane, who was reportedly a Mede.
As such, Cyrus may have grown up speaking
both Old Persian and his mother's tongue of
Median. His mother Mandane was also royalty.
She was the daughter of the ruling king of the
Medes, a man named Astyages, who all the tribes of
the Persians swore loyalty to. As such, Cyrus was
likely born the immediate heir to the province of
Anshan, and, through his mother, a distant heir
to the throne of the entire Median Empire, a
unique situation that his mother would no doubt
have reminded him of many times throughout his
childhood. One legendary account of Cyrus'
birth and upbringing is given by Herodotus.
The first year after the marriage of his daughter,
Astyages saw a vision. A vine appeared to spring
from his daughter, which overspread all Asia. On
this occasion, also he consulted his interpreters.
The result was that he sent for his daughter from
Persia. When the time of her delivery approached,
the Magi had declared the vision to intimate that
the child of his daughter should supplant him
on the throne. On her arrival, he kept a strict
watch over her, intending to destroy her child.
Unable to kill the small baby himself,
Astyages enlists the help of a general
named Harpagus, and tells him to take the
baby Cyrus out into the wilds, and there
leave him in the open to die. But Harpagus
takes pity on the child and lets him live.
He instantly sent for a herdsman who, as he knew,
pursued his occupation in a place among mountains,
frequented by savage beasts. When the herdsman
had received his orders, he took the child and
returned to his cottage. From here, this fairy
tale unfolds with a colorful brutality. When
the boy's identity is finally discovered,
the king Astyages is enraged, and realizes
that the general Harpagus has betrayed him. As
punishment, he orders that Harpagus' son is to
be secretly killed, then he invites the general to
a banquet at which he puts on a lurid spectacle.
Before the rest, as well as before Astyages
himself, dishes of mutton were placed.
But to Harpagus, all the body of his son was
served, except the head and the extremities,
which were kept apart in a covered basket. After
he seemed well satisfied, Astyages asked him how he
liked his fare. Harpagus expressed himself greatly
delighted. The attendants then brought him the
basket which contained the head and extremities of
his child, and desired him to help himself to what
he thought proper. Harpagus uncovered the vessel
and beheld the remains of his son. He continued,
however, master of himself and betrayed no unusual
emotions. When Astyages inquired if he knew of
what flesh he had eaten, he acknowledged
that he did, and that the king's will was
always pleasing to him. Saying this, he took the
remains of the body and returned to his house,
meaning, as I suppose, to bury them together.
Astyages thus revenged himself upon Harpagus.
Despite taking this brutal revenge on his general,
Astyages’ court priests or Magi convinced
the Median king not to kill Cyrus and to let
him go, but the general Harpagus would
never forget what the king had done.
This story would no doubt have thrilled
Herodotus’ audience as he read it out to them,
but we can be relatively sure that it is a piece
of mythology. The trope of the abandoned child
is one that reoccurs throughout folklore and
myth, from the Greek story of Oedipus to the
Akkadian King Sargon to Moses and the fairy
tale Snow White. The story of the king's vision
is another theme that often occurs in the early
lives of great men, and perhaps most famously in
the Gospel of Matthew, when King Herod orders all
the baby boys in Jerusalem to be killed when told
of the birth of Jesus, and the most colorful
and bloodthirsty part, the revenge taken by
tricking someone into eating the flesh of their
loved ones also occurs throughout mythology
and folklore, featuring, for instance, in
the sixth book of Ovid's Metamorphosis,
which then inspired Shakespeare's bloodthirsty
play, Titus Andronicus. For all these reasons,
it's safe to assume that this story of Cyrus'
early life is a work of literature rather than
fact, but I include it to give a sense of the
kinds of stories that constantly swirled around
the life of this enigmatic character, as an
example of why the accounts of Herodotus need
to be treated carefully as we go forward, and of
course, because no one can resist a good story.
The rest of what we know about Cyrus' life
can be gleaned in fragments. The Greek writer
Xenophon records what Persians some centuries later
still remembered about the character of Cyrus.
Even to this day, the barbarians tell in story and
in song that Cyrus was most handsome in person,
most generous of heart, most devoted
to learning, and most ambitious,
so that he endured all sorts of labor and faced
all sorts of danger for the sake of praise.
As a boy, the young Cyrus would have
been raised with all the skills needed
by a man of the Persian royal line.
The first five years of a boy's life
he would spend with his mother and the other
women of the tribe, as Herodotus describes.
Until his fifth year, his father does not lay eyes
on the boy, who spends his time with the woman.
This is done so that if he dies during his
upbringing, he will not distress his father.
During this time, his mother would have cared for
her son, taught him the language and the songs of
her people, and all the while must have looked at
her little son growing, and wondered whether one
day he might be destined for great things. But
after that, the boy was handed over to his father
and taught the ways of men. Although our typical
impression of Persian royalty, derived largely from
Greek sources, is one of luxury and decadence,
in fact the early life of Cyrus would have
been quite different. The Persians were a hardy
pastoral people who survived by herding cattle,
hunting on horseback with a bow and arrow and
with trained hawks, and these are all the skills
that the young Cyrus would have learned, as the
Greek writer Strabo recounts. From age five to twenty-five,
they are trained to shoot with the bow,
handle the spear, ride on horseback,
and speak the truth. They gather the boys in one
place, after rousing them before dawn with the
noise of a bronze instrument, and order them to
follow in a race after marking out a distance of thirty
to forty stadia. Strabo records the broad education
that a Persian prince was required to absorb.
They train them in speaking loudly, how to breathe
and use their lungs, and to endure heat and cold
and rain, and to cross torrents, and also to herd
flocks and live outdoors, surviving on wild fruit,
terebinth, acorns, wild pears. Their daily diet,
after exercising, consists of bread, barley,
cardamom, grains of salt, and baked or boiled
meat, and water to drink. They hunt by hurling
spears from horseback, and with bows and lassos.
Towards evening they learn to cultivate plants,
how to cut and collect roots, how to make
weapons, and the technique of making linen cloth
and hunter's nets. But while the Persians still
lived a relatively humble and hardy existence,
the later Greek writer Xenophon records that
by this time the Medes were quite different.
Cyrus noticed that his grandfather Astyages was
wearing makeup, with eyes outlined, color rubbed on
his face, and false hair, as was the Median fashion.
All this is Median, as are the purple tunics and
sleeved coats, the necklaces worn around the
neck and the bracelets on their wrists, while
the Persians, even now in their homes, have
simpler clothes and a more humble lifestyle.
When Cyrus was grown, he succeeded his father
as the ruler of the Persian tribe of the
Pasargad, and it's then that he found himself
coming into conflict with his grandfather,
the king of the Medes, Astyages. The exact details
of this conflict we can never know, but it's
clear that Cyrus saw his moment. He gathered the
tribes of the Persians around him. The Pasargadae,
Maraphiya, the Masapiya, the Derusiad, Germaniya,
Dai, Mardi, and Sagartiya, all of them united by
their language and shared culture. Herodotus
imagines Cyrus giving a rousing speech.
Cyrus collected and slaughtered
all his father's goats, sheep,
and oxen in preparation for entertaining the
whole Persian army at a banquet, together with
the best wine and bread he could procure.
The next day the guests assembled, and
were told to sit down on the grass and enjoy
themselves. "Men of Persia," he exclaimed,
"you are the arbiters of your own fortune. My
voice is the voice of freedom. I am the instrument
of your prosperity. Decline all future obedience
to Astyages.” The Persians, who had long spurned at
the yoke imposed on them, were glad of such a
leader, and ardently obeyed the call of liberty.
All the tribes of the Persian peoples now united
around Cyrus. Astyages was naturally enraged. He
ordered that all his court soothsayers,
who had long ago convinced him to spare
and release Cyrus, should be crucified. Then,
with their screams still echoing in his ears,
he gathered his armies and marched out to meet
the Persian upstart. As he marched, he sent out
messengers, demanding in furious terms that Cyrus
come and bow at his feet, as Herodotus recounts.
Cyrus sent the messenger back with the threat
that he would be there a good deal sooner than
Astyages liked. Astyages thereupon armed the Medes
to a man, and so far lost his wits as to appoint
Harpagus to command them, having apparently
forgotten how he had treated him. The result
was that when he took the field and engaged the
Persian army, some of Harpagus' men deserted to
the Persians, and the greater number deliberately
shirked fighting and took to their heels.
With the betrayal of this general, Astyages
was forced to gather a militia made up of
what citizens he could find, and made
a last ditch attempt to stop the army
of Cyrus. When Astyages learned of the
disgraceful collapse of the Median army,
he armed all Medes, both under and over military
age who had been left in the city,
led them out to battle, and was defeated. His
men were killed, and he himself was taken alive.
Harpagus was a real person, attested in a number
of sources, and one inscription found on a clay
tablet in the ruins of Babylon, known as the
Nabonidus Chronicle, also hints at a betrayal
by one of Astyages' generals, although the
general isn't named. In the sixth year,
King Astyages called up his troops and marched
against Cyrus, king of Anshan, in order to
meet him in battle. The army of Astyages revolted
against him, and in fetters they delivered him
to Cyrus. Cyrus marched against the country of
Ecbatana; the royal residents he seized; silver,
gold, other valuables of the country Ecbatana
he took as loot and brought to Anshan.
Whether because Astyages really was the
sadistic tyrant that Herodotus claims,
we don't know, but after this, Harpagus would go
on to become one of Cyrus' most loyal generals.
And Herodotus claims that after the battle,
Harpagus came to jeer at the captured Astyages.
After the capture of Astyages,
Harpagus came and jeered at him,
asking what it felt like to be a slave
instead of a king. Then said Astyages,
"You are not only the wickedest, but
the most stupid of men. As things are,
the innocent Medes have become slaves instead of
masters, and the Persians masters of the Medes.”
Cyrus was now the lord of the
mountainous regions of the Near East,
stretching from Persia right up to
perhaps their most powerful rival.
This was a kingdom in the region of Asia Minor, in
what is now Western Turkey, the kingdom of Lydia.
The Lydians were an ancient people. They
were even mentioned in Homer's epic,
the Iliad, where they are listed
among the allies of the Trojans.
They spoke their own Lydian language, which was in
the same Indo-European family as Persian and Greek.
And according to the account of Herodotus,
throughout the war between Cyrus and Astyages,
the king of Lydia had been watching.
He believed he had sensed an opening to
take advantage of the chaos and expand his
borders even further. His name was Croesus.
Croesus' kingdom of Lydia was astonishingly rich.
In fact, the legendary King Midas, who
had the power to turn anything to gold
with his touch, was supposed to have
once ruled over one of its regions.
Lydia stood above a rich seam of electrum, a
naturally occurring alloy of gold and silver,
that its people had eagerly mined for
centuries, and in the preceding decades,
they had learned how to remove the silver from
this alloy to create coins of pure gold on an
industrial scale. As the first people in
the world to produce gold in this manner,
the Lydians were soon at the heart of
the world's most lucrative industry.
As a result, King Croesus soon
gained a reputation as a new Midas,
the richest man in the world. Plutarch, in
his Life of Solon, gives one description
of his legendary appearance at
the Lydian capital of Sardis.
He was decked out with everything in the
way of precious stones, dyed raiment,
and wrought gold that men deem remarkable
or extravagant or enviable, in order that he
might present a most august and gorgeous spectacle.
With these vast riches, King Croesus of
Lydia had also spent lavishly on his army,
the pride of which was a wing of well-trained
armored cavalry, as Herodotus recounts.
Now, at this time, there was no nation
in Asia more valiant or warlike than the
Lydian. It was their custom to fight
on horseback, carrying long spears,
and they were skilled in the management of horses.
With this force, and bankrolled by his almost
limitless wealth, Croesus had gone to war
from the moment he became king. He ruthlessly
conquered the various Greek city-state colonies
that had been founded on the western coast of Asia
Minor, the regions of Ionia, Aeolia, and Doria,
until he ruled virtually all of the western
segment of what is now Turkey. But still he
dreamed of more, and he had watched the civil war
unfolding in far-off Persia with some interest.
Croesus was actually the brother-in-law of
the Median king Astyages, having married
his sister as part of a peace treaty, one in
which he had promised to keep his border at
a river known to the Greeks as the Halys, and
which is known today as the Kizilirmak. But
with Astyages now toppled, Croesus believed
the former treaty was no longer in effect.
He now saw his chance to advance beyond
this border and become not just the
richest but also the most powerful
man in the eastern Mediterranean.
But Croesus was not an impulsive
man. Before any course of action,
he did what any sensible man of this
time would do; he asked the gods.
For this purpose, he sent out
messages to all the oracles of Greece,
asking them whether he should attack
the Persians. Of all these oracles,
the most famous and widely
respected was the oracle at Delphi.
The oracle at Delphi was a woman who bore
the title of Pythia. For at least 200 years,
people had flocked from all over the Greek world
and beyond to ask the oracle what the future
held. Once someone came to consult the oracle,
they would be asked to make their offerings,
often a laurel wreath and a black ram, and then
they would be allowed to ask their question. The
Pythia would then descend into a stone chamber
called the adyton. Ancient sources describe this
room filling with vapors, and from these vapors she
would enter into a state of spiritual possession,
in which the god Apollo would actually
speak through her, often in cryptic riddles.
The Greek writer Strabo describes the effects
of these gases. They say that the seat of the
oracle is a cave that is hollowed out deep
down in the earth, with a rather narrow mouth
from which arises breath that inspires a divine
frenzy, and that over that mouth is placed a high
tripod, mounting which the Pythian priestess
receives the breath and then utters oracles.
The writer Plutarch, who served
as a priest of the temple at
Delphi for many years some centuries later,
described the strange smell of these fumes.
Occasionally and fortuitously, the
room in which they seat the god's
consultants is filled with a fragrance and breeze,
as if the adyton were sending forth the essences
of the sweetest and most expensive perfumes.
The description of this chamber is so specific
and intriguing that archaeologists have long
searched for a scientific explanation
for these fits of ecstatic possession.
It's been suggested that the area beneath the
adyton was filled with smoldering branches of
oleander, a common but extremely poisonous plant
with bright pink flowers that grows around Greece
and Asia Minor. Eating just one leaf of oleander
is enough to kill a person, and inhaling its smoke
can have powerful psychoactive effects, including
hallucinations. Another suggestion is that the
priestesses were inhaling fumes that actually
emanated from the depths of the earth itself.
Delphi sits at a lively geological zone, at a
confluence of two major tectonic fault lines,
and the limestone beneath it is high in
content of hydrocarbon gases, and among
them the psychoactive gas ethylene. Ethylene
has been used historically as an anesthetic,
but inhaled in small amounts, it can bring about
a conscious but trance-like state which is said to
include euphoria, out of body experiences,
and in some cases, fits and convulsions.
The gas also has a sweet smell, which
might explain Plutarch's description of
the chamber's aroma. Modern analysis has
shown that spring water near the site of
the oracle does contain traces of ethylene,
and that at certain fissures in the rock,
the gas may have been released in sufficient
concentrations to account for the Pythia's
visions. If this is the case, then it's
no surprise that the shrine at Delphi had
been revered for so many years as a place where
humans could commune with the voices of the gods,
which seemed to breathe out of
the rocks of the earth itself.
What is certain is that the Delphic
Oracle was revered around all of Greece,
and her word could make or break the
fortunes of even the most powerful kings.
It was to this priestess that King Croesus
of Lydia sent his messengers, as he considered
making war on Cyrus and the young power
of Persia. These messengers came laden
with gifts that spoke to the enormous wealth of
the kingdom of Lydia, as Herodotus describes.
He melted down a vast store of gold
and made of it ingots. These were 117 in
number. He bade also to be made a figure of
a lion of refined gold, weighing ten talents.
When these offerings were fully made, Croesus
sent them to Delphi, and other gifts besides,
namely two very great bowls,
one of gold and one of silver.
With their lavish gifts handed over, Herodotus
recounts the message that the oracle gave to King
Croesus. The Lydians, who were to bring these gifts
to the temples, were charged by Croesus to inquire
of the oracles. Shall Croesus send an army against
the Persians? The judgment given to Croesus by the
oracle was that if he should send an army against
the Persians, he would destroy a great empire.
Buoyed up by this seemingly enthusiastic advice,
Croesus immediately readied himself for war.
In 547 BC, King Cyrus of Persia got news that
Croesus had marched out of his capital of Sardis
and crossed the old border of the Halys River.
From there, the Lydian forces had swept into the
region of Cappadocia, a landscape of strange
rock formations and white limestone gullies,
and rounded on the regional capital of Pteria,
as Herodotus recounts. Croesus, then passing over
his army, came to the part of Cappadocia called Pteria,
where he encamped, and laid waste the farms of the
Syrians; and he took and enslaved the city of the
Pterians, and took also all the places about it,
and drove the Syrians from their homes,
though they had done him no harm.
When Cyrus heard the news of this Lydian invasion,
it must have troubled him. He was a new ruler in
a warrior culture that revered strength above
all else. If he failed to meet this challenge,
he could lose the respect of all his subjects, and
his young empire would fall apart as quickly as
it had begun. He quickly gathered his forces
of combined Persian and Median warriors, and
marched out to meet King Croesus in the shadow
of the now ruined city of Pteria. Cyrus,
mustering his army and gathering to
him all those who dwelt upon his way,
went to meet Croesus. When Cyrus had come
and encamped face to face with Croesus,
the armies made trial of each other's strength
with might. The battle was stubborn. Many on
both sides fell, and when they were parted
at nightfall, neither had the advantage.
Croesus was clearly surprised by the strength
of Cyrus' response. Despite the famous Lydian
cavalry, the clash had ended in a stalemate,
and now his invasion had lost all momentum.
To make matters worse, winter was drawing in.
The mountainous geography of Asia Minor means
its winters can be extremely punishing, with
temperatures below freezing, and even dropping
to -20° in extreme conditions. In that season,
snow could sit on the ground for weeks at a time,
and military campaigns became impossible.
As a result, Croesus decided to retreat back
over the Halys River, and return through the
mountains to his capital of Sardis. There, he
would send out requests for reinforcements from
his allies in Egypt and Babylon, even planning
to request help from the warlike Greek city
of Sparta. It was in his mind to muster all
these forces and assemble his own army, then to
wait ‘til the winter was over and march against
the Persians at the beginning of spring. With
such intent, as soon as he returned to Sardis,
he sent heralds to all his allies, summoning
them to assemble at Sardis in five months time.
But none of this would come to pass. That's
because Croesus had drastically underestimated
the Persian king Cyrus. Rather than waiting
out the winter, as Croesus had expected,
Cyrus took a remarkable decision. When
Croesus marched away after the battle,
Cyrus took counsel and perceived thereby
that it was his business to march with
all speed against Sardis before the power
of the Lydians could again be assembled.
He marched his army into Lydia, and so himself
came to bring the news of it to Croesus.
The march would have been a difficult one. Ahead
of the Persian army lay nearly a thousand kilometers
of rocky, mountainous territory, with unfamiliar
routes and narrow passes through the mountains.
Winter was coming, perhaps snow falling. As
such, we can only imagine the astonishment
of King Croesus of Lydia as he looked out over
the walls of his capital of Sardis and saw the
amassed forces of the Persian army arriving
on the horizon. Herodotus recalls his shock.
All had turned out contrary to Croesus'
expectation, and he was in a great quandary.
Nevertheless, he led out the Lydians
to battle in the plain, wide and bare.
As the Persians rode to battle, they would
have been struck by the landscape they saw
ahead of them, dominated by a remarkable
series of monuments, the burial mounds of
Lydia's ancient kings. For centuries, Lydians
had buried their rulers in vast tombs, with
bases built of stepped limestone and marble,
and great heaps of earth towering above them.
The largest of these, the mound thought to
have been built for Croesus' father, Alyattes,
has the same footprint as the Pyramid of Giza,
and stands to nearly half its height at 63 meters.
Littered around the high plain to the north
of Sardis stood around 150 of these burial
mounds, and they would have made an imposing
statement about the power and prestige of the
ancient kingdom of Lydia, and up ahead
stood the impregnable citadel of Sardis.
While the main city was defended by a strong
wall, it was the citadel that made the city
virtually impossible to capture. It was perched on
a knife edge of limestone jutting out of the plain
known as Mount Tmolus, its sides so steep that
the fortress barely needed walls in some places.
Although the Persian army was large, Cyrus
would need every one of his soldiers to take
that fortress, and he had already seen the damage
that the powerful Lydian cavalry could inflict
on his army. But he brought a secret weapon
to the battlefield, as Herodotus describes.
Assembling all the camels that followed
his army bearing food and baggage, he took
off their burdens and set men upon
them equipped like cavalry men. He
ordered them to advance ahead of his army
against Croesus' horses. Horses fear camels,
and can endure neither the sight nor the
smell of them. So, when battle was joined,
as soon as the horses smelt and saw the camels,
they turned to flight, and all Croesus’ hope was lost.
With their cavalry scattered, the Lydians
retreated to their lofty citadel, and the
Persians besieged the steep-sided fortress. Thesiege
went on for fourteen days, during which they must
have wondered how they would ever capture it, but
they were about to get a stroke of luck. Herodotus
recalls that one side of the city's citadel
looked out over a cliff so sheer that it was
comparatively lightly defended, since no one could
ever hope to climb it. On the eve of the fourteenth
day of the siege, a soldier in the Persian army
spotted a Lydian warrior climbing down a hidden
route on this side of the fortress. As he watched,
he saw the man climb down to an outcrop, where he
reached down and picked up his helmet, which had
fallen from the rampart. No doubt worried that
he would be disciplined by his superiors for
losing his helmet, this Lydian had dared the
death-defying climb down to retrieve it, but he had
also inadvertently shown the Persians the way up.
This Mardian had seen one of the Lydians
descend by this part of the citadel after
a helmet that had fallen down, and fetch it; he
took note of this and considered it, and now he
himself climbed up, and other Persians after
him. Many ascended, and thus was Sardis taken.
King Croesus of Lydia was captured. With
the fall of Sardis, the entirety of his
powerful kingdom, and its vast stores of
gold, passed into the hands of the Persians.
Herodotus ends his story
with a final ironic twist.
So, the Persians took Sardis and made Croesus himself
prisoner, he having reigned fourteen years and been
besieged fourteen days, and, as the oracle foretold,
the empire he brought to an end was his own.
Herodotus recounts that Cyrus actually spared
Croesus’ life, and took him on as an adviser.
While we have no further evidence of this, it is
plausible, since we do have documentary evidence
that Cyrus spared the lives of many of the men he
conquered. With the kingdom of Lydia and its vast
wealth now absorbed into his growing empire, Cyrus
turned his sights on the lowlands of Mesopotamia,
where the empire of Babylon now stretched.
In the years since the fall of the Assyrian
Empire, the Babylonians had become one of
the most powerful empires in the world,
conquering Syria and all the way down the
coast of Palestine to the borders of Egypt, but
they had experienced some considerable unrest
among their conquered territories. Just
one example was the incessant rebellions
of the Jewish kingdom of Judah, centered
around its ancient capital of Jerusalem.
The people of Judah had despised the Assyrian
Empire in its day, and now hated the Babylonian
Empire that replaced it just as much.
At the beginning of the 6th century BC,
a number of the Judean cities in the Levant
rebelled against Babylonian rule. As a result,
in 597 BC, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon
marched west and besieged the city of
Jerusalem. After a grueling thirty-month siege, the
city fell, and King Nebuchadnezzar sacked it, and
burned down the temple that stood on the temple
mount, as the Hebrew Book of Kings recounts.
And it came to pass in the ninth year of his
reign that Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,
came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem,
and encamped against it; and they built forts
against it round about, and he burned
the house of the Lord, and the king's
house, and all the houses of Jerusalem. Even
every great man's house burnt he with fire.
The kingdom of Judah was now officially
dissolved. Large numbers of its people
captured in the sack of Jerusalem were rounded
up and deported to Babylon to be resettled,
a typical tactic of Mesopotamian empires
when dealing with troublesome populations.
But despite these troubles in some of its more
restive provinces, the rule of Nebuchadnezzar II
was prosperous, and it's during his reign
that Babylon built its most famous landmark,
the Ishtar Gate, a towering edifice faced all
over with brilliant blue glazed bricks, which
opened up onto a grand processional street.
Nebuchadnezzar ruled for nearly sixty years,
but after his death, the young empire fell into a
period of turmoil. His son and chosen successor,
Amel-Marduk, was apparently incompetent, and ruled
for only two years before being overthrown by his
brother-in-law. This man ruled for only four
years before dying and passing the throne to
his son, who ruled for only two or three months
before himself being killed and deposed.
This period of turmoil came to an end with the
reign of a king in Babylon named Nabonidus.
He stands out in history as a truly
enigmatic figure. He had no relation
to any previous king, and the fact
he even became king at all seems
to have come as something of a surprise
to him, as he writes in one inscription.
I am Nabonidus, the only son who has nobody. In
my mind, there was no thought of kingship. One
strange aspect of Nabonidus is that he appears
to have had somewhat unusual religious beliefs.
The principal god of Babylon had always been
Marduk, the king of the gods and lord of the
universe, but Nabonidus was devoted instead to
the moon god Sin, after apparently seeing him in
a vision. In fact, carvings of Nabonidus often
show him offering his reverence to the carved
figure of the moon. This seems to have caused
some friction in the country, as one Babylonian
clay tablet complains. He made the image of
a deity which nobody had ever seen in this
country. He introduced it into the temple and
placed it upon a pedestal. He called it by the
name of Sin. It is adorned with a crown of lapis
lazuli, its appearance that of the eclipsed moon.
At one point, he seems to have taken a
self-imposed exile from Babylon lasting ten years,
in which he devoted himself to quiet meditation
in the faraway temple of Tayma in what is today
Saudi Arabia. This distanced him from his subjects
and disrupted the ceremonial calendar of the city.
He even failed to show his face at the annual
Babylonian New Year festival, celebrated at the
spring equinox. Usually, the king would climb to
the highest chamber of the city's temple, where
the high priest of Marduk would ceremonially slap
him on the face, reminding him to be humble to the
gods. But Nabonidus, busy worshiping the moon
god far away in Arabia, didn't attend, as one
Babylonian inscription recounts. The king was
in Tayma, while the crown prince, his officers,
and his army were in Akkad. The king did
not come to Babylon in the month Nisanu.
The god Nabu did not come to Babylon. The
New Year's festival did not take place.
We don't know how the war with the Persians began,
but it had clearly begun to seem inevitable.
Around 540 BC, Nabonidus ordered that the statues
of the gods of each city in his empire should
be transported to Babylon for safekeeping. One
Babylonian letter from an official in the city
of Uruk describes the preparations to transport
the goddess Eanna down the river to Babylon on a
raft buoyed up by inflated goat skins. Letter of
Rimut to Nabu-mukin-zeri. May Nabu and Marduk bless
my brothers! Send me one leather mat and five
inflated goat skins for the boat so that the
Lady Eanna may go to Babylon on the Euphrates.
Other tablets describe the priests continuing
to give offerings of food to the holy statues as
they sailed down the river on the way to Babylon.
Soon war was declared, and Cyrus marched
down into the lowlands of Mesopotamia,
arriving in the year 539 BC.
King Nabonidus gathered his armies and set out
to meet the invaders at a place called Opis.
The text known as the Nabonidus Chronicle recounts
in sparse terms what happened next. In the month
Tashritu, when Cyrus did battle at Opis on the
bank of the Tigris against the army of Babylon,
the people of Babylon retreated.
He carried off the plunder and
slaughtered the people. On the 14th day,
Sippar was captured without a battle.
Nabonidus fled. On the sixteenth day, the army
of Cyrus entered Babylon without a battle.
One Babylonian text written afterwards on the
order of Cyrus is called the Cyrus Cylinder.
In this piece of official propaganda, he explains
that the Babylonian god Marduk had called on
him, since King Nabonidus had so heretically
turned his back on the city's patron deity.
In Nabonidus' mind, reverential fear of Marduk,
king of the gods, had come to an end. He did yet
more evil to his city every day. He brought ruin
on his people. Marduk inspected and checked all
the countries, seeking for the upright king
of his choice. He took the hand of Cyrus,
king of the city of Anshan, and called him by his
name, proclaiming him aloud for the kingship over
all of everything. Marduk joyfully looked at
Cyrus' good deeds and at his righteous heart.
He made him take the road to Babylon, and marched
at his side like a friend and companion. Without
combat or battle, he caused him to enter Babylon,
his city. He saved Babylon from oppression.
The people of Babylon must have feared the
worst when Cyrus' army swept into the city,
but they were pleasantly surprised. The Nabonidus
Chronicle even describes how Cyrus ordered Persian
soldiers to stand guard outside the great
temple to Marduk, called the Esagil, to ensure
its protection. Until the end of the month, the
shield-bearers of Persia surrounded the gates of
the Esagil. There was no interruption of whatever
rites in the Esagil and the other temples, and
no ritual date was missed. There was peace in the
city when Cyrus spoke greetings to all of Babylon.
The gods of Akkad that Nabonidus had brought to
Babylon returned safely to their cult places.
All of this signaled that Cyrus
wanted to promote an image of
himself as a very different kind of
ruler to those who had come before.
When he arrived, Cyrus found Babylon full of
captured peoples who had been seized from their
lands in far-flung provinces and forced
to relocate to the city, and remarkably,
one of his first decrees as the ruler of
Babylon was to allow all of these peoples,
if they wished, to return home. These
people came from all over the empire.
Elamites and Medes from the Zagros, Aramaeans from
Syria, Phoenicians from cities like Tyre and Sidon,
even Egyptians and Arabs. But most famously,
they also came from the Hebrew kingdom of Judah.
The Hebrew Bible recalls this event. Now in the
first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, he made a
proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put
it also in writing, saying, "Thus saith Cyrus,
king of Persia, the Lord God of heaven hath
given me all the kingdoms of the earth. Who
is there among you of all his people? His God
be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem."
Like the people of Babylon with Marduk, the
Judeans interpreted Cyrus as having been
chosen by their god Yahweh to set them free.
Cyrus might have calculated that sending back
these few thousand deportees would improve
his reputation around his new empire, but
he couldn't have predicted quite how long
or how far this act of kindness would be
remembered. Since the Hebrew Bible would form
the basis for the future Christian religion,
his good deed would be immortalized in the holy
text of one of the world's major religions. The
Hebrew poet prophet we know as Second Isaiah
would even go so far as to name Cyrus with a
title that in Hebrew was pronounced ‘mashiach’,
which meant ‘the anointed one of God’, a title
which gives us the English word ‘messiah’. This
is what the Lord says to Cyrus, his Messiah,
whose right hand he will empower. Before
him, mighty kings will be paralyzed with
fear. Their fortress gates will be opened, never
to shut again. Cyrus would be the first and only
non-Jewish person to ever be awarded that title,
a testament to his skill at winning people over.
Meanwhile, the name Babylon would pass into
memory as a byword for oppression, slavery, and
corruption, a reminder that our actions in history
can resonate far longer than we might ever expect.
The empire that Cyrus forged the
Persians would refer to as Kh-sha-thra,
meaning simply ‘the kingdom’, and it would always
be a cultural melting pot. The Persians themselves
had begun as a successful marriage of Iranian
and Elamite cultures, but over the decades
and centuries that followed, they would add
elements of Mesopotamian dress, religion, art,
and iconography. They also introduced ideas
in architecture, medicine, and engineering
from conquered regions like Lydia, the Greek
cities of Asia Minor, Egypt, and Phoenicia.
Herodotus describes this Persian ability to
synthesize the ways of others. No race is so
ready to adopt foreign ways as the Persian.
For instance, they wear the Median costume,
as they think it handsomer than their own,
and their soldiers wear the Egyptian armor.
Persia was an empire that combined
and reproduced the best ideas from
each culture it absorbed, and in that
way it was remarkably successful.
For the Greek writers who encountered Persians
and described them, one of the most remarkable
aspects of their appearance was their clothing,
as Herodotus describes. Around their heads they
wore something called a tiara of soft felt,
while on their body they wore a multicolored
sleeved garment and a piece of armor in appearance
like fish scales made of iron. Around their legs
they wore trousers. Trousers were an innovation
developed on the Eurasian Steppe, designed to
protect the legs while riding a horse night and
day. In the years after the conquest of Babylon,
the Persians would combine these with fine fabrics
and expensive dyes to create new, stylish garments.
The Greek writer Xenophon describes the
appearance of the Persian prince. Upon a chariot
he appeared in the gates, wearing his tiara
upright, a purple tunic shot with white,
trousers of scarlet dye about his
legs, and a mantle all of purple.
Greeks had for centuries worn simple
tunics and cloaks, and always left their
legs bare. They found the appearance of
Persian trousers ridiculous, and mocked
their baggy appearance using the slang word
‘thulakoi’, a word which means ‘sacks’. In fact,
if an ancient Greek were somehow transported into
the modern day, perhaps the first thing they would
be struck by was how everyone around them was
dressed like a Persian. Apart from their clothes,
Persians also looked physically different to
the Greek writers who documented them. When they
captured Persian prisoners of war, ancient writers
expressed surprise at how white their skins were
compared to the sunburned Greeks, and considered
this a sign of their softness and effeminacy.
When the Greeks depicted Persians in their
art, their beards are always shown to be
big and bushy, with long mustaches, and
we also see the importance of beards
in Persian culture reflected in the carved
palace reliefs at Persepolis. In these images,
the men with the highest status are always
shown to have the most formidable beards.
Religion in the empire was complex and
diverse, and it's not actually known for
sure what religious beliefs early rulers like
Cyrus would have held, but they were likely
followers of an early form of Iranian religion
and what would later become Zoroastrianism.
The Zoroastrian faith was founded
by a prophet named Zarathustra,
who likely lived somewhere in the
eastern regions of the Iranian world,
perhaps in modern Afghanistan or Tajikistan.
He was born sometime around the year 1,000 BC,
likely into a nomadic or semi-nomadic people.
At the age of thirty, while attending his people's
annual spring festival, Zarathustra saw a
vision in which a shining being appeared
to him and taught him about the god called Ahura
Mazda, or ‘wise lord’. This shining being also told
him about an evil entity known as Angra Mainyu,
or ‘the destructive spirit’. For all of time,
Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu had been locked in
an eternal battle in which the forces of ‘asha’,
or ‘order’, were pitted against the evil forces of
‘druj’, or ‘deception’. After this vision, Zarathustra
decided to devote his life to promoting the good
force of asha and spreading the word of the wise
god Ahuram Mazda. His life teachings would be
collected in a series of texts known as the Gathas,
the divine songs, which forms part of the
Zoroastrian religious text, the Avesta.
Fundamentally, Zarathustra taught that a person's
thoughts, words, and actions formed an unbroken
chain. If you strived to think only good
thoughts, then you would speak only good
words, and then commit only good actions, as the
following Zoroastrian prayer song describes.
With outspread hands in petition for that help,
O Mazda, I will pray for the works of
the holy spirit, O thou the right,
whereby I may please the will of good thought;
the wise whom thou knowest as worthy, for
their good deeds and their good thought,
for them do thou fulfill their longing.
Part of the attainment of good thought and
good words was an uncompromising adherence
to speaking the truth, something that Persians
took extremely seriously. Herodotus describes
witnessing this firsthand. They consider
telling lies more disgraceful than anything
else, and, next to that, owing money. There are
many reasons for their horror of debt, but
the chief of their conviction is that a man
who owes money is bound also to tell lies.
Zoroastrians particularly held earth, fire,
and water to be sacred and agents of purifying.
Zoroastrian temples had at their heart an
eternal flame that was supposed to never be put
out. The priests of the temple would wear face
masks over their mouths so that their unclean
breath would not pollute the sacred fire.
Persians also held rivers and other bodies
of water to be sacred, as Herodotus describes.
The following are certain Persian customs which
I can describe from personal knowledge. The
erection of statues and altars is not an
acceptable practice amongst them, and anyone
who does such a thing is considered a fool.
God in their system is the whole circle of
the heavens, and they sacrifice to him from the
tops of mountains. They also worship the sun,
moon and earth, fire, water, and winds, which
are their only original deities. They have
a profound reverence for rivers.
They will never pollute a river with
urine or spittle, or even wash their hands
in one, or allow anyone else to do so.
The inscriptions of the Persians continually
reference the god Aruha Mazda, but the Persian
court also held reverence for other gods like
the warrior goddess Anahita, an Elamite god
named Human, and Mithra, god of the sun, guardian
of cattle, the harvest, and the waters. Perhaps
partly as a result of their religious conviction,
the Persians were also prolific gardeners. While
we can't reconstruct the true shape of Achaemenid
religion, later Zoroastrians held that the dry
and desert parts of the world were made barrenby
the destructive and deceptive spirit Angra Mainyu.
Meanwhile, the spirit of the good Ahura Mazda
gave them the task of turning the deserts of the
world green. What we know for sure is that
wherever they went, the Persians cultivated
ornamental gardens. These gardens they gave a
name that suggested exclusivity and security, from
the Persian words ‘pairi’ and ‘daiza’, meaning ‘walled’ or
‘bricked around’; ‘pairidaiza’. The name for these gardens
passed into Greek as ‘paradeisos’, which gives us the
English word ‘paradise’. These places particularly
impressed Greek travelers to Persia, since the
Greeks at that time had no culture of ornamental
gardens. In his rhetorical work Oeconomicus,
the Greek writer Xenophon describes with awe
the flourishing paradaizas that the Persians
built in the Lydian capital of Sardis, which
he witnessed with his own eyes. He was astonished
at the beauty of the trees within, all planted at
equal intervals, the long straight rows of waving
branches, the perfect regularity, the rectangular
symmetry of the whole, and the many sweet scents
which hung about them as they paced the park.
These gardens also impressed Hebrew
writers, who adopted the word ‘pardes’
into Hebrew to describe an orchard,
and they may have used these gardens
as a model for the walled garden of
Eden in the Book of Genesis, which
is thought to have been written down in
its final form during the Persian period.
Since earth and water were both considered
sacred elements in Iranian religion,
it was considered blasphemy to pollute them with
the remains of the dead. Instead, the bodies of
those deceased were taken into high structures
built on the tops of hills or mountains.
Today, these have become known as the Towers of
Silence, presided over by Zoroastrian priests known
as Magi. Here the bodies were laid out and left
for the birds to pick apart, and then the bones
were bleached by the sun and wind. Herodotus
describes this practice with some distaste.
So much I can say of them from my own
certain knowledge, but there are other
matters concerning the dead which are
secretly and obscurely told; how the dead
bodies of Persians are not buried before
they have been mangled by birds or dogs,
but this is the way of the Magi. I know for
certain, for they do not conceal the practice.
It's not known exactly how widespread this
practice was during the Persian period, and
it was never used for rulers. Later Achaemenid
kings were buried in rock-cut tombs usually
in the sides of a cliff at a place calledNaqsh-i
Rustam, a few kilometers northwest of Persepolis.
There, the stone walls and floors of
their chambers kept the bodies from
making contact with the sacred earth beneath
them, and as an added benefit, were visible in
the distance from the great city, a potent
reminder of the kings that had come before.
Greeks like Herodotus were also bemused
by the Persians’ custom of each year
celebrating the day of someone's
birth. Of all days in the year,
a Persian most distinguishes his birthday,
and celebrates it with a dinner of special
magnificence. A rich Persian on his birthday
will have an ox or a horse or a camel or a
donkey baked whole in the oven and served up
at the table, and the poor some smaller beast.
At these celebrations, it's likely that a great
amount of wine would have flowed. The nomadic
ancestors of the Persians had likely drunk
out of cups made of hollowed-out cow horns,
but the Persians had long since replaced
bone for silver and gold. Now they drank
out of vessels called rhytons that were still
shaped like animal horns but could be wrought
in ornate patterns in precious metals. Wine
was produced in the upland regions of Persia
in the area of modern Shiraz, and imported
from vineyards in Syria and elsewhere.
Persians not only enjoyed wine for its
pleasurable effects, but believed it could
actually help them consider the world from
a different angle, as Herodotus describes.
They are very fond of wine. If an
important decision is to be made,
they discuss the question when they
are drunk, and the following day,
the master of the house where the discussion was
held submits their decision for reconsideration
when they are sober. If they still approve it, it
is adopted. If not, it is abandoned. Conversely,
any decision they make when they are sober is
reconsidered afterwards, when they are drunk.
However, despite their love
of the good things in life,
Persians were still governed by strict rules
about behavior in public, as Xenophon recounts.
There remains even unto this day evidence of their
moderate fare; for even to the present time,
it is a breach of decorum for a Persian to
spit or to blow his nose. It is a breach of
decorum also to be seen going apart either to
make water or for anything else of that kind;
and this would not be possible for them
if they did not lead an abstemious life.
With his vast empire conquered and his rule
steadily solidifying across his domain,
Cyrus settled down and began to build a grand
palace complex which he would name his capital.
He elected to build this at the location of
his decisive final battle against the Medes at
a place called Pasargadae. Archaeology has shown
that the palace that Cyrus built would be of a
strange and unprecedented design, a garden city
dotted with pavilions and palace structures made
of stone and decorated in marble. In this
way, it actually mirrored the structure of
a nomadic camp stretched out over the plain,
but with stone structures instead of tents.
It was a clear architectural nod to the nomadic
roots of the Persian people, and perhaps the kind
of habitation in which Cyrus himself felt
the most comfortable; surrounded by nature.
The defining feature of this palace would be
its garden, a masterpiece of a Persian pairidaiza.
Modern pollen analysis has shown that
trees like cypress and hazelnut, oak,
elm, and pistachio were cultivated here. Fed
by water channels cut from dressed stone,
this paradise would have blossomed even on
this high arid plateau in the middle of Persia.
The garden was divided into four parts, and
it's thought that this was designed to evoke
the same phrase that Cyrus would use again
and again whenever he described himself in
his inscriptions. I am Cyrus, king of the
four quarters of the world. This quartered
design would become integral to the design of
Persian gardens around the world, which followed
the style known as ‘chaharbagh’, or ‘four-part gardens’.
In later centuries, these would be found across a
vast stretch of the Earth, from the gardens of
Seville in southern Spain to those of Northern
India and the Taj Mahal, but it's a design that
began here in the gardens of Cyrus the Great.
Construction on the palace of Pasargadae
began in 546 BC, and would continue for
the next sixteen years. But it would be brought
to a sudden end by an event that must have
sent shockwaves around the Persian Empire
and beyond. That was the death in the year
530 of the King of Kings, King of the Four
Quarters of the World, Cyrus the Great.
Just as with his birth, there are many stories
told of how Cyrus the Great met his end,
and many of them have the hallmarks of mythology.
What we know with some certainty is that Cyrus
had decided to expand his empire into the
northeast in the great plain that stretches
out between the Caspian and Aral seas. Much of the
eastern half of the Persian Empire was unknown to
the Greeks, and so, our history of it is largely
blank. From the perspective of written history,
the eastern side of the empire is like the dark
side of the moon, a place always in shadow. But
according to Herodotus, this region was home
to a warlike people known as the Massagetai.
The people Herodotus called the Massagetai likely
called themselves something like the Masyaka-ta,
meaning ‘the fish eating people’, since they made
their livelihood fishing in the Caspian Sea.
Herodotus describes their simple way of life.
These are said to be a great people and mighty,
dwelling towards the East and the sunrise, where
men are said to live whose food is raw fish, and
their customary dress seal skins. The Massagetai
also seemed to have used some kind of drug,
possibly cannabis, during their ceremonies
and celebrations, as Herodotus recounts.
Assembling in companies and kindling
a fire, the people sit around it and
throw a plant into the flames. Then the
smell of it as it burns makes them drunk
as the Greeks are with wine, and more and
more drunk as more is thrown on the fire,
‘til at last they rise up and dance, and even
sing. Such is said to be their way of life.
Perhaps realizing the dangerous nature of the
campaign he was embarking on, Cyrus made sure to
settle the matter of his succession before he set
out. He named his son Cambyses as his successor,
and also made him regent of the empire in his
absence. He also had a younger son, Bardiya, and to
this man he gave a large and wealthy area in the
East, which he also exempted from taxes. It was a
clear sign that he hoped his sons would manage
to live in peace once he was no longer around.
According to Herodotus, the ruler of
the Massagetai was a queen named Tomyris.
Now, at this time, the Massagetai were ruled by
a queen called Tomyris, whose husband was dead.
Cyrus sent a message with a pretense of wooing
her for his wife, but Tomyris would have none of
his advance, well understanding that he wooed
not her, but her kingdom. After this peaceful
approach failed, Herodotus claims that Cyrus lay
an ambush at a feast, in which he served strong
wine to a group of Massagetai noblemen, among them
the son of the queen Tomyris. These nomadic men,
unused to strong wine, were soon roaring
drunk, and in this helpless state,
Cyrus' men fell on them and killed them all.
After this deceitful act, the heartbroken Tomyris
rallied her forces and rode out to crush
Cyrus with the rage of a grieving mother.
There perished the greater part of the Persian
army, and there fell Cyrus himself. Tomyris
filled a skin with human blood and sought
for Cyrus' body among the Persian dead.
When she found it, she put his head into
the skin and spoke these words of insult
to the dead man; “Even as I threatened, so
will I do, and give thee thy fill of blood.”
Exciting and poetic as it is, this stirring tale
of treachery and revenge is likely a folk tale.
Herodotus himself points
out that even at the time,
multiple versions of the great man's
death were already circulating.
Many stories are related to Cyrus' death; this
that I have told is the worthiest of credence.
In contrast, the Greek writer Xenophon has Cyrus
die peacefully in bed, surrounded by his sons.
The Greek Ctesias, who lived in Persia, describes
him being wounded in battle against the Scythians,
but coming home to his palace at Pasargadae,
where he later died of his wounds. Ultimately,
we can never know the truth, which must lie
somewhere between these accounts. What we
know is that in the year 530 BC, Cyrus the
Great died, likely on campaign in the East.
He would be buried in a modest tomb at his
palace of Pasargadae, a monument that combines
some elements of the mound tombs of Lydia that he
had seen on his march to Sardis all those years
before, and others based on the stepped design of
a Mesopotamian or Elamite ziggurat, the stone base
raising him above the sacred earth in accordance
with Iranian tradition. The Greek traveler Arrian
passed through the region some centuries later,
and wrote one description of the tomb's remaining
finery. The tomb of the famous Cyrus was in the
royal park at Pasargadae, and around it a grove of
all kinds of trees had been planted. The park was
also watered by a stream, and high grass grew in
the meadow. In the building lay a golden coffin
in which the body of Cyrus had been buried. A
carpet of Babylonian tapestry with purple rugs
formed the bedding. Upon it were also a Median
coat with sleeves and other tunics. Perhaps since
Iranians before that point typically didn't use
gravestones or monuments for their burials, there
is a distinctly defensive tone to the inscription
reportedly carved over the tomb. Upon the tomb,
an inscription in Persian letters had been placed,
which bore the following meaning in the Persian
language. O man, I am Cyrus, son of Cambyses, who
founded the empire of the Persians, and was king
of Asia. Do not therefore grudge me this monument.
With the death of Cyrus, his son Cambyses
ascended to the throne. Cambyses' name in
Old Persian was Kamboojiya. He was the son and
heir of a king who had started with virtually
nothing, the ruler of a small tribe, and with
cunning tactical genius and political acumen
had carved out the world's largest empire
in only three decades, and brought countless
people under his banner. The expectation
on this prince must have been immense,
but unfortunately, he would not live
up to the promise of his father.
There seems to have been some question over
the abilities of Cambyses from the very start.
In 538 BC, his father had named him governor
of Babylon and its surrounding areas, but he
was removed from that position after only
nine months. The reason for this is unclear,
but we might take it as a warning sign that
all would not be well when this young prince
took the throne. According to the account
of Herodotus, one of his first acts was
to have his brother Bardiya secretly killed,
ensuring that no rival to his rule remained
alive. To do this job, he enlisted the
help of a priest or Magi named Gaumata.
Cambyses, as the Egyptians say,
became absolutely mad, and the
first of his evil deeds was that he
put to death his brother, Bardiya,
who was of the same father and the same
mother as himself. Some say that he took
him out to hunt and there slew him; others that he
brought him to the Erythraian Sea and drowned him.
When this Magi Gaumata sent him word that
his brother was dead and his reign secure,
Cambyses set his sights on further territorial
expansion and the one great prize that would
outdo the conquests of his esteemed father,
the ancient and wealthy kingdom of Egypt.
Egypt at this time was undergoing something ofa
renaissance. Under the long forty-four-year rule of its
pharaoh Ahmose II, the lands of the Nile
Valley had prospered and regained some of
the glory that had characterized its golden
ages of the Old, Middle, and New Kingdoms.
But in 526 BC, this great pharaoh died, and
the rule of Egypt passed on to his son,
a man named Psamtik III. Cambyses, perhaps knowing
all too well the pressure of trying to live up
to a high-achieving father, immediately
prepared to invade the lands of Egypt.
The very next year, in the spring of 525
BC, Cambyses set out. To help him on his
campaign, he recruited an enormous force
drawn from all corners of the empire.
A Persian army of this time was made up of a
patchwork of different units, who each fought
in the traditional manner of their homeland.
There were long-speared cavalry from Lydia,
shielded spearmen from Babylonia,
archers from the Medes, and Elamites.
He also recruited skilled sailors from the
Phoenician cities on the Palestinian coast,
along with their swift ships, and heavily-armored
Greek hoplites from the Ionian cities of Asia.
These Greek warriors would become known
as the bronze men from the sea, since
they had trained to fight with heavy
armor covering most of their bodies.
With this force of perhaps 50,000 soldiers,
Cambyses set out to Egypt, sending half
by land and half by sea on the Phoenician
ships, and met at the port town of Pelusium,
the gateway to the Nile Delta. At Pelusium,
sources indicate that the pharaoh of Egypt
had sent a man named Wedjahorresnet to command
much of the Egyptian fleet, with orders to repel
the advancing army of the Persians. But this
man, for unknown reasons, decided to defect.
Whether bribed or threatened, when Cambyses
arrived, Wedjahorresnet turned his ships
over to the Persian army and swore allegiance to
Cambyses. Now without a navy and cut off on the
waterways of the Nile Delta, the Egyptian
army was swiftly surrounded and defeated.
Wedjahorresnet was suitably rewarded
for his part in the battle. One inscribed
statue now kept in the Vatican
describes the strange trajectory
of his life, and perhaps gives some sense
of why he refused to fight the Persians.
The great king of all foreign lands, Cambyses,
came to Egypt, bringing the foreigners of every
foreign country with him. When he had
taken possession of the entire country
and he was made great sovereign of Egypt, his
majesty appointed me his chief physician.
I protected the inhabitants from the very large
troubles which had come from all over the
whole country, and I defended the meek against
the powerful. I saved those who were afraid.
Cambyses was crowned as the pharaoh of Egypt in
August 525 BC, only a few months after setting out
on campaign in the city of Sais in the western Nile
Delta. There he was awarded the pschent, the double
crown that combined the white bulbous crown of
Upper Egypt with the red crown of Lower Egypt,
a symbol that had been worn by Egyptian pharaohs
for more than two and a half thousand years.
But if Herodotus is to be believed, Cambyses
didn't share his father's diplomatic streak.
When he captured the pharaoh Psamtik, he seems to have
enjoyed humiliating him with a cruel spectacle.
On the tenth day after the surrender of the walled
city of Memphis, Cambyses took Psamtik, king of
Egypt, who had reigned for six months, and confined
him in the outer part of the city with other
Egyptians to insult him. He dressed the daughter
of the king as a slave and sent her out with a
pitcher to fetch water, together with other girls
from the families of the leading men. So, when the
girls went out before their fathers’ eyes, crying
and lamenting, all the rest answered with cries
and weeping, seeing their children abused,
but Psamtik only bowed himself to the ground.
Next, the king's son was paraded before him in
chains, to be led to his death. But once again,
the king did not cry. It was only when he saw an
old servant of his walking among
the crowd that his mask cracked.
After these two had gone, it happened
that there was one of his companions,
a man passed his prime who had lost
all his possessions, and begged of the
army. This man now went out before Pharaoh
Psamtik and the Egyptians. When Psamtik saw him,
he broke into loud weeping, striking his
head and calling on his companion by name.
In Herodotus, Cambyses comes across as a
sadist and a tyrant. He describes him brutally
suppressing the religion of Egypt, destroying
temples as a punishment for rebellions, flogging
priests, and even killing the sacred Apis bull,
a beloved and holy animal in the city of Memphis,
believed to be the living offspring of the god
Hathor. But actual Egyptian sources undermine
this view. They show that Cambyses worked hard to
ingratiate himself with his Egyptian subjects. Far
from murdering an Apis bull, he actually attended
the funeral services when one of these bulls died,
and no Egyptian sources mention its murder.
But the very existence of these stories, still
circulating in Egypt about eighty years later
when Herodotus passed through, shows us that
Cambyses was unpopular. He appears to have
attempted to reform the Egyptian tax system
so that citizens no longer paid their taxes to
the temples, something that would have enraged
the ancient and powerful priestly class. While
Cyrus had skillfully absorbed people into the
empire by listening to what they wanted and
ensuring he gave it to them, his son Cambyses
tried to meddle in local affairs, and alienated
his people. Whether Egypt would have eventually
erupted in rebellion against Cambyses, we
will never know. That's because in 522 BC,
only four years into his rule as pharaoh, Cambyses
got some remarkable and extremely disturbing news.
Back in Babylon, a man had shown up
claiming to be his younger brother,
Bardiya, and this man had
declared himself king of Persia.
In the version of this story
that Herodotus gives us,
Cambyses had already secretly killed his
younger brother, Bardiya. For this reason,
he immediately realized that this Bardiya
must be an impostor, and the only person
it could be is the only other person who knew
that Bardiya was dead, the Magi named Gaumata.
Realizing that he might be about to lose his
kingdom, Cambyses leapt onto his horse and set
out to fight this impostor, but he would never
reach the battlefield, as Herodotus describes.
Having wept his fill in great grief for all
his mishap, he leapt upon his horse with
intent to march forthwith to Susa against
the Magi. As he mounted, the scabbard knob
of his sword slipped off, and the naked blade
struck his thigh, wounding him. After this,
the bone became gangrened and the thigh
rotted, which took off Cambyses, son of Cyrus,
who had reigned in all seven years and five
months, and left no sons or daughters at all.
This was an unbelievable situation. With Cambyses
dead, the impostor Bardiya now ruled the empire.
This man, by a grand coincidence, happened to be
the spitting image of the disappeared prince, a
likeness so perfect that all but one of Bardiya's
wives failed to notice the difference between
them. This wife, a woman named Phaedyme, alerted
some members of the court. Aghast that an
impostor was sitting on the throne, these six
men began a plot to overthrow the false king.
To help them in their plan, they
recruited the help of a faithful
general of the dead king Cambyses and a
distant member of the royal family,
a man who in Old Persian was named Daari-vaush.
His name would be rendered into Greek as Darius.
Now came to Susa Darius, son of Hystaspes,
from Persia, and on his coming, the six
Persians resolved to make Darius, too, their
comrade. The seven then met and gave
each other pledges and spoke together.
Darius and his co-conspirators chose their
moment, then struck. They drew their daggers
and burst into the false king's apartment while
he slept, managing to overpower his bodyguards.
Finally, the conspirators found themselves
in a bitter hand-to-hand struggle,
which Herodotus renders in thrilling fashion.
Two of the seven, Darius and Gobryas, hurled
themselves into the chamber with him. Gobryas and
the Magi grappled together, while Darius stood
perplexed in the darkness, fearing to strike.
Gobryas, seeing Darius stand idle, cried to know
why he did not strike. “For fear of stabbing you,”
quote Darius. “Nay,” said Gobryas, “thrust with
your sword, though it be through both of
us.” So, Darius thrust with his dagger, and by
good luck it was the Magi that he stabbed.
The impostor king lay dead, and in the
aftermath of this assassination, the
plotters swept in to consolidate their power.
Finally, as the dust of the coup settled,
Darius was made king, and the line
of Cyrus the Great was saved.
This official version of events would
be immortalized not only by Herodotus,
but also chiseled into the limestone
face of a cliff on Mount Bisitun, a hundred
meters above the ground, and visible for all to
see on the road from Ecbatana to Babylon.
In this Bisitun inscription, Darius
recounts the exact story that Herodotus
does of Cambyses killing his brother in secret
and the impostor Bardiya taking the throne.
A son of Cyrus, named Cambyses, one of our
dynasty, was king here before me. That
Cambyses had a brother, Bardiya by name, and Cambyses
slew this Bardiya. There was a certain man, a Magi,
Gaumata by name, who raised a rebellion,
saying, "I am Bardiya, the son of Cyrus,
the brother of Cambyses.” He seized the
kingdom. The people feared him exceedingly,
for he slew many who had known the real
Bardiya so that no one would recognize him.
The inscription is accompanied
by a carving showing Darius with
one foot placed on the fallen body of
the Magi Gaumata, beside which Darius
recounts in his own words the plot to
overthrow and murder the impostor king.
There was none who dared to act against Gaumata,
the Magi, until I came. Then I prayed to Ahura Mazda.
Ahura Mazda brought me help. On the tenth day of
the month, with a few men, I slew that Gaumata,
the Magi. I dispossessed him of the kingdom. By
the grace of the Ahura Mazda, I became king.
This remarkable story is so outlandish that
many modern historians actually don't believe
it at all. They propose an alternate version of
events, but this other version is in some ways
just as incredible. It's now thought that
the man who rose up in rebellion against
Cambyses was actually his younger brother,
Bardiya, and that everything that makes up
the core of Herodotus' account and the
Bisitun inscription was an audacious ruse
by the man who had ultimately seized
the throne, the usurper king Darius.
We can never know whether all the conspirators
were in on the lie or whether Darius had actually
convinced them that Bardiya was an impostor.
Either way, the official propaganda of Darius'
new regime clearly won the day, now inscribed
in stone at Mount Bisitun and clearly circulating
among the people to such an extent that they
would recount it to Herodotus generations later.
The story of the impostor Bardiya had now, for
all intents and purposes, become the truth.
Darius was now the new King of Kings,
King of the Four Quarters of the World.
It's clear from the Bisitun inscription that
from the moment Darius seized power, he faced
an understandable crisis of legitimacy. He was
not the direct descendant of Cyrus the Great,
but claimed to be a distant cousin of the
great empire builder. In a culture completely
dominated by the idea of telling the truth, the
creeping suspicion that the new king might have
lied his way to the throne must have eroded many
people's faith in his rule. Perhaps as a result,
more impostors were now popping up all over
the land, as the Bisitun inscription recounts.
After I had slain Gaumata, the Magi, a certain man named
Ashina raised a rebellion in Elam, and he spoke thus
unto the people of Elam; “I am king in Elam.”
Thereupon, the people of Elam became rebellious,
and a certain Babylonian named Nidintu-Bel
raised a rebellion in Babylon. He lied to
the people, saying, "I am Nebuchadnezzar,
the son of Nabonidus.”
Whether these people were actually lying
about their identities or whether Darius
was now calling all of his enemies impostors,
we can never know, but while he set out to
crush these rebellions, more broke out
in virtually every corner of the empire.
While I was in Babylon, these provinces revolted
from me; Persia, Elam, Media, Assyria, Egypt,
Parthia, Margiana, Sattagydia, and Scythia.
At least one of these rebel leaders also claimed
to be the missing brother, Bardiya, something that
must have thrown up even more confusion. It was a
time when people's shared reality was becoming
completely untethered, and now no one knew who
the rightful king was. For a time, it must have
looked like the vast empire was about to collapse
entirely, but this was not to be the case. That's
because Darius seems to have been an exceptionally
talented general, and gathered a number of capable
allies among the Medes, Persians, and Armenians.
These loyal generals swept around the empire,
putting down one rebellion after another, and
crucifying each of their leaders in
cruel public displays of brutality.
In just his first year of rule, Darius claimedto
have put down no fewer than nineteen rebellions.
This is what I have done. By the grace of Ahura
Mazda, have I always acted. After I became king,
I fought nineteen battles in a single year,
and by the grace of a Ahura Mazda,
I overthrew nine kings, and I made them captive. As
to these provinces which revolted, lies made them
revolt so that they deceived the people. King
Darius says, "You who shall be king hereafter,
protect yourself vigorously from lies and punish
the liars well. Then may your country be secure.”
To address his crisis of legitimacy, Darius
set about marrying every available woman he
could find descended from the family of Cyrus
the Great, including two of Cyrus' daughters.
In this way, he interjected himself and
his sons into the line of succession, and
silenced his critics. Darius even went so far
as to create a legendary common ancestor, who
he gave the name Ha-khaa-manish. This figure
would be called Achaemenes by the Greeks, and
it's by this name that the bloodline
of Cyrus is often called today the
Achaemenids, even though Cyrus himself never
mentioned the name in his inscriptions.
To make this deception complete, Darius even
sent stonemasons to Cyrus' palace at Pasargadae
in a shameless attempt to rewrite history
and link the great king with his own line.
These men carved a simple message into the
stone pillars in the voice of the previous king.
I am Cyrus the king, an Achaemenid.
The only thing that gives the game away to
modern archaeologists is that this message
was carved in a type of cuneiform alphabet
that would not be in use until the reign
of Darius, since in other inscriptions Darius
boasts about introducing it. For this reason,
most historians believe that
it was not written by Cyrus.
Eventually, after three years of near ceaseless
fighting, the rebellions burned themselves
out like wildfires running out of dry brush, and
Darius was able to settle down into a relatively
stable rule. From that rocky start,
Darius underwent a campaign of expansion,
especially in the East. Conquest of parts
of India had begun under Cyrus the Great,
but Darius pushed the empire's boundaries right
up to the area of the Punjab in Northern India,
conquering virtually all of what is today
Pakistan. Although sources on this side of
the empire are scant, it's worth remembering
that the Persian Empire was a territory that
straddled worlds, from the humid riverlands
of India to the Eurasian Steppe in the north,
the Indian Ocean to the south, and Europe,
North Africa, and the Mediterranean in the west.
Darius now ruled over a land area of 5.5
million square kilometers, larger than the Roman
Empire at its height, and with an estimated
population of as many as 20 million people.
With a world population at the time of little
more than 100 million, this means that as
much as 20% of the world's population
now lived in Darius' Persian Empire.
But throughout the years of rebellion,
Darius had seen just how fragile the
empire could be. He was determined
to bring about a number of reforms
designed to strengthen it and turn it
into a power that could last. To help
him with the administration of this unwieldy
territory, Darius reorganized the empire,
dividing it into 20 regions over which governors
ruled. These governors were called kh-sha-thra-pavan,
which would enter Greek as the word ‘satrap’. These
regions would thus become known as satrapies.
Darius also issued a standard currency
based on gold and silver coins called darics,
mostly used in the Western Empire. These were
stamped with an image of a king holding a bow,
and would soon be found all around the
ancient world. He also standardized a
system of weights and measures, allowing for a
level of coordination in the Achaemenid economy.
The economy is actually one of the few areas
where the Persians themselves are able to
speak in the light of history, and that is due
to one remarkable find that occurred in 1933.
In that year, archaeologists excavating the ruined
palaces of Persepolis uncovered two small chambers
within a bastion along the fortification wall at
the edge of the great stone terrace. There, they
discovered a vast cache of tens of thousands
of clay tablets and fragments. These texts,
which today are known as the Persepolis Fortification
Tablets, offer a rare glimpse into the workings
of the Achaemenid administrative system. They are
written almost exclusively in Elamite, but some
also appear in Phrygian, Aramaic, Old Persian, and
even Greek, and record the collection, transfer, and
storage of goods in the region around Persepolis,
controlling the movements of grain and fruit,
sheep, goats, cattle and poultry, as well
as flour, bread, beer, wine, fruits, oil,
meat, and animal hides. These resources were
distributed to temples, members of the royal
family, courtiers, priests, religious officials,
administrators, travelers, laborers, and artisans.
The following tablet written in Elamite shows
the transfer of barley in the year 501 BC.
130 liters of barley from the possessions of
Amavrta have been received by Barik-'El as his
rations. Given in the town of Ithema,
in the 21st year in the month Shibar.
Other tablets describe payments in
silver made to important officials.
To Shaka the treasurer, Budkama declares that
Herdkama, the Egyptian, was the chief of a team
of 100 laborers, and is entitled to three
karsha and two and a half shekels of silver
as his wage. The historian Lloyd Llewellyn
Jones describes this administrative regime.
Nothing was too trivial to be logged;
the number of nails needed to repair a
wooden boat in Upper Egypt, or the fact that a
plague of locusts meant that a mud-brick wall
could not be built in Bactria; each and every
case was individually recorded, signed off,
reported to the central administration
in Persia, and methodically filed away.
At the old Elamite capital of Susa,
Darius would construct a palace that
for much of the empire's history would
act as the buzzing hive mind of this
administration. Susa was well connected by
road to all parts of the empire, and also by
a canal that linked it to the Euphrates
River, and from there the Persian Gulf.
As a result, at Susa, messengers would come
and go, day in and day out, bearing tablets and
missives, keeping this machinery moving and the
resources of the empire flowing out to its people.
As a testament to his vision of an empire
that brought peoples together, this palace
would form an architectural representation
of everything the empire had achieved,
as Darius describes in one inscription.
Yaka timber was brought from Gandara and from
Carmania. The gold was brought from Sardis and
from Bactria. The precious stone lapits lazuli
and carnelian was brought from Sogdiana. The stone-
cutters who wrought the stone were Ionians
and Sardians. The goldsmiths were Medes and
Egyptians. The men who wrought the wood were
Sardinians and Egyptians. The men who wrought
the baked brick were Babylonians. The men who
adorned the wall, those were Medes and Egyptians.
Darius also commissioned a new palace that
would be built at the site of Persepolis,
lined with a series of beautiful reliefs that
formed an artistic representation of his vision,
showing scenes of all the different peoples
of the empire wearing their distinctive dress,
all coming to bring tribute to the King of Kings.
Partly due to their roots in nomadic culture, the
Persian royal court was mobile, and under Darius,
they traveled between royal centers throughout
the year. During the sweltering summer months,
the king and his entourage, eunuchs, servants,
bodyguards, children, and the palace women moved
up into the mountains to the summer capital
of Ecbatana, but when the cold winters brought
snow to the hills, the court would move to the
lowlands in the foothills of the Zagros Mountains,
and the buzzing nerve center of Susa. Spring
festivals they would carry out in the Persepolis.
Perhaps partly due to his experience
of marching armies back and forth,
putting down ceaseless rebellions
in the first years of his reign,
one of Darius' first priorities was
to improve the empire's road system.
Chief among these crucial arteries was the
highway known as the Royal Road. Some sections
of this highway were already ancient, and had been
maintained by the Assyrian and Babylonian empires,
but Darius improved and expanded it until
it stretched from the empire's westernmost
city of Sardis near the Mediterranean, all the way
through Asia Minor and northern Mesopotamia until
it reached the winter capital of Susa at the foot
of the Zagros Mountains. Herodotus describes this
well-made highway. All along the road are royal
staging posts and excellent rest houses, and,
as it runs through inhabited country, the entire
road is safe. If the Royal Road had been measured
correctly, then the whole journey is exactly
ninety days by foot. This Royal Road allowed the
transfer of information at a speed yet unknown
in the ancient world, as Herodotus describes.
There is nothing that travels faster and
yet is still mortal than these couriers.
It is said that there are as many horses
and men posted at intervals as there are
days required for the entire journey, so
that one horse and one man are assigned to
each day; and neither snow nor rain nor
heat nor dark of night keeps them from
completing their appointed course
as swiftly as possible. The first
courier passes on the instructions to
the second, the second to the third,
and from there they are transmitted from one to
another as in the torch race among the Greeks.
It was along one of these roads, in the year 499
BC, that a messenger would have ridden, carrying
news to Darius of a worrying development
in the westernmost part of his empire.
These were the Greek-speaking coastal regions
of Asia Minor, or what is now Turkey.
These areas had once been conquered by the
wealthy king Croesus of Lydia, and were then
absorbed by Cyrus. By this time, they had been
ruled by Persia for the last forty years, but now
a messenger brought news that they had exploded in
revolt, and worst of all, they had outside help.
The Greek states along the western
stretch of the coast of Lydia were
divided into three main groups; the
Aeolians, the Ionians, and the Dorians,
who all spoke related dialects of Greek.
It was the Ionians that had by this time
had enough of Persian rule. These were
a group of proud and wealthy cities in
Asia Minor that were traditionally believed to
have once been colonies of the city of Athens.
The Persians had never really worked out how best
to rule over independent Greek city-states. In much
of their empire, they would rely on already
existing structures of power to rule over
conquered subjects. For instance, in the Hebrew
world, they relied on local priesthoods to keep
the peace, and in Egypt, they adopted the power of
the pharaohs and temple priests. These provinces
would then be appointed satraps to lead them,
who were almost always Persians appointed by the
King of Kings. Very occasionally they were local
rulers who were allowed to keep most elements of
their previous rule and the privileges of their
position, so long as they swore allegiance to the
Persian Empire. According to Persian customs, this
swearing of allegiance was done by offering the
King of Kings a gift of earth and water. These
were the elements crucial for life, two of the
three holy elements in Iranian belief, and they
represented the elemental power of the monarch.
But each Greek city-state was ruled by a chaotic
mess of aristocratic factions sharing power in
complicated arrangements. For this reason,
the Persians had simply settled for choosing
a Greek from each city-state and appointing him
ruler. These rulers the Greeks referred to with
a word they had loaned from Lydian, meaning
‘monarch’. That word was ‘tyrannos’, or ‘tyrant’.
In his work Politics, the Greek
writer Aristotle describes the
difference between a king and a tyrant.
Tyranny is monarchy exercising the rule
of a master. Kings rule according to law
over voluntary subjects, but tyrants over
involuntary. The one are guarded by their fellow
citizens. The others are guarded against them.
These Greek tyrants found themselves in a
difficult position. As Greeks themselves,
they soaked up all the anger of their people
towards Persian rule, and they were often
incompetent, corrupt, and poorly suited to
rule. Partly as a result of this system,
by the year 499 BC, all of Ionia was bubbling
over with rebellion. The man who would throw a
spark into this dry tinder was named Aristagoras,
the Greek tyrant of the Ionian city of Miletus.
Miletus was a fine port town that was known as
the Jewel of Ionia, and its tyrant Aristagoras
was an unlikely revolutionary. In fact, he had
ruled his city on behalf of the Persians for
the last twelve years, but he had done a poor
job. After attempting a failed invasion of
the island of Naxos on behalf of the empire,
he found himself deeply in debt and wildly
unpopular among his people. Fearing that the
Persians would replace him as the tyrant of
Miletus due to his incompetence, he decided
to change tactics, as Herodotus describes.
It was likely, he thought, that his
lordship of Miletus would be taken
away from him. With all these fears
in mind, he began to plan revolt.
But Aristagoras knew that rebelling against
the Persian Empire would be useless unless he
could get some outside help. To this end,
he crossed the sea to Greece in secret,
hoping to find allies. First, he approached the
most powerful city in the large southern peninsula
known as the Peloponnese, the city of Sparta.
The Spartans had for centuries cultivated a
powerful mythos about themselves, and were widely
regarded as the major military power in Greece.
This reputation was sufficient that Sparta
itself had never seen fit to build a city wall,
boasting instead that its soldiers were all the
wall it needed. Aristagoras knew that if his rebellion
was to be a success, he would need the help of
the Spartans. He went to appeal to one of Sparta's
two kings, a man named Cleomenes, and with him he
brought a novel innovation, as Herodotus recounts.
Aristagoras, the despot of Miletus, came to
Sparta, and when he had audience of the king,
he brought with him a bronze tablet on which the
map of all the earth was engraved,
and all the sea and all the rivers.
“All the Spartans would need to do,” he told
the king, “was cross into Asia, march to the
Persian capital of Susa, and kill King Darius.”
The Spartan king began to suspect that this all
sounded a bit too good to be true. The king asked
Aristagoras how many days journey it was from the
Ionian Sea to the Persian king. He said that
it was a three-month journey in land. At that,
Cleomenes cut short all the rest that Aristagoras
began to tell him about the journey, and bade his
guests depart from Sparta before sunset. “For
never,” he said, “would the Spartans listen to
the plan if Aristagoras desired to leadthem
to a three-month journey from the sea.”
The refusal of King Cleomenes
partly had to do with the unique
characteristic of Sparta as the
Greek world's biggest slave state.
Like most Greek city-states, Sparta was a society
built on slavery, but whereas other cities like
Athens kept slaves to work in households and
workshops, and usually had a slave population
a little larger than their free population,
Sparta was in a different league entirely.
Practically its entire agricultural sector ran
on a vast slave class known as helots, a kind of
laboring serf bound to the land, who outnumbered
the free population by perhaps as many as ten to
one, and, crucially, these helots were Greek. Other
Greek cities held a taboo against holding other
Greeks as slaves, and their slave populations were
made up of Scythians, Thracians, and other peoples
who had been captured in piracy or war. In Sparta,
this helot underclass was made up of whole Greek
ethnicities that had been conquered long ago,
and they were reviled and brutally mistreated.
The Greek writer Myron of Priene writes the
following description of the helots’ lot.
They assigned to the helots every
shameful task leading to disgrace,
for they ordained that each one
of them must wear a dog-skin cap
and wrap himself in skins and receive a
stipulated number of beatings every year,
regardless of any wrongdoing, so that
they would never forget they were slaves.
The helots were even ritually murdered each
year in a little understood ceremony known
as the Krypteia, a word meaning ‘secret acts’.
Understandably unhappy with their condition,
the helots rose up in rebellion against
their Spartan abusers a number of times.
As a result, the Spartan military was made
constantly at the ready, and their soldiers
carried their spears with them at all times.
Cleomenes must have known that if the Spartan
army was away from home for at least six months
in Persia, the helots would likely take the
opportunity to rebel, and Sparta would burn.
Despite its great reputation for warfare,
the Spartan army was tied down in its lands,
and was all but useless for anything but the
briefest and nearest campaigns. Discouraged,
Aristagoras left, and traveled to appeal to the
perhaps more unlikely allies. This
was the Greek city-state of Athens.
Although supposedly the mother
city of the Ionian colonies,
the city of Athens had no great reputation for
warfare, and it was at that time in a state of
some political upheaval. Until recently,
it had been ruled by a tyrant of its own,
a man named Hippias, but he had
been overthrown, and in his place,
the Athenians had brought in a radical system.
This was an emerging form of government named
after the Greek words ‘demos’, or ‘people’, and
‘kratos’, meaning ‘power’. That name was democracy.
The Athenian system allowed its citizens to
participate in government through various councils
and committees, and enabled them to vote on what
policies and actions the government should take,
usually by a show of hands with special bronze
ballots or using white and black stones.
Athens was not the only Greek democracy or the
first one, but it was the newest, largest, and the
most powerful city yet to adopt it. Democracy in
Athens was only available to adult male citizens
and women slaves, and the third or so of the
population that were considered citizens of
other cities were excluded. In reality, only about
a third of the adult population was actually given
any right to political participation, but it was
still a relatively progressive system for the
time. The Greek critics of democracy argued that the
system had merely replaced the whims of a king or
tyrant with the whims of the mob, which could
be no less capricious, arbitrary, or foolish.
And when Aristagoras arrived in Athens that year,
pleading for help in his foolhardy rebellion,
some would say that the Athenian people proved
their critics right, as Herodotus describes.
Coming before the people, Aristagoras spoke
to the same effect as at Sparta of the good
things of Asia, and how the Persians in war
were want to carry neither shield nor spear,
and could easily be overcome. Truly, it would seem
that it is easier to deceive many than one, for he
could not deceive King Cleomenes of Sparta, one
single man, but 30,000 Athenians he could. The
Athenians then were won over, and voted the
sending of twenty ships in aid of the Ionians.
The tiny city of Athens had just voted to attack
the largest empire that the world had ever seen.
The Athenians’ twenty ships landed in Asia
Minor in 498 BC, packed with soldiers.
There, they met with the Ionian Greeks
of Ephesus, who guided them through the
mountains to their target, the
old Lydian capital of Sardis.
Sardis was the home of a Persian satrap who
was the brother of the King of Kings, Darius.
It was home to a Persian military headquarters
and a large armory, and the Greeks hoped that
by seizing the city, they would strike a lethal
blow to Persian rule. The Greeks moved quickly
through the rocky valleys and took the unprepared
Persian garrison by surprise, breaking into the
city's lower reaches. The Persians retreated
and holed up in the towering citadel that
still looked down from the top of Mount Tmolus,
just as King Croesus had half a century before.
While the Greeks camped in
the city, a fire broke out,
whether accidentally or not, and it soon
spread. The great capital of Sardis burned.
The greater part of the houses in Sardis
were of reeds, and as many as were of brick;
even they had roofs of reeds. So it was that
when one of these was set afire by a soldier,
the flames spread from house to house all
over the whole city. So, Sardis was burned,
and therein the temple of Kybele,
the goddess of the country.
The once grand city of Sardis was now a smoking
ruin. The Athenians knew that a Persian army must
have been racing towards them at that very moment
to take the city back, and with the temple of
Kybele destroyed, they now feared that the gods
themselves might also have turned against them.
The Athenians began to wonder if perhaps this
whole venture had been a mistake. They fled
the ruined city and pelted back to the coast
and their ships, and along the Royal Road of
the Persian Empire, the news raced back to King
Darius at the pace of the empire's fastest horses.
When Darius heard of the burning of the city
of Sardis by this group of rebels, he must have
been astonished and enraged. His own people
rebelling was one thing, but the intervention
of the Athenians was quite another. These
insignificant people from across the Aegean Sea
had meddled completely unprovoked in his empire,
fomented a rebellion, landed a surprise attack
on one of his most revered cities, and burned
it to the ground, all before scuttling back to
their ships and sailing away. To the great King
of Kings, the Athenians must have seemed little
better than pirates, as Herodotus recounts. When
it was reported to Darius that Sardis had been
taken and burnt by the Athenians, he asked who the
Athenians were, and after receiving the answer,
he called for his bow. This he took, and, placing an
arrow on it, shot it into the sky, praying as he
sent it aloft. O Zeus, grant me vengeance on the
Athenians. Then he ordered one of his servants to
say to him three times whenever dinner was set
before him, "Master, remember the Athenians."
The Athenian Greeks loved repeating this story as
a testament to the king's obsession with revenge
against the city of Athens for daring to stand
up to the empire. They loved imagining the name
of their city being spoken in the great court
of Persia, but from the Persian perspective,
we might also read it another way, that the
Athenians were at that time so insignificant
that without constant reminders, King Darius
feared he might forget about them completely.
Darius was a man who ruled by a code, and
he inscribed this code of principles into
the outer wall of his tomb at Naqsh-i
Rustam. It's these principles that
must have been running through his mind when
considering how to deal with the Athenians.
King Darius says, "I am friend of the right.
Of wrong, I am not a friend. It is not my wish
that the weak should have harm done him by the
strong, nor is it my wish that the strong should
have harm done him by the weak. The right,
that is my desire. The man who is cooperative
according to his cooperation, I reward him. Who
does harm, him according to the harm I punish.”
Only two years later, that punishment
would come in the form of an invasion.
The Greek mainland of Europe is separated from
Asia by a narrow channel that connects the
Mediterranean to the Black Sea, and in places, this
channel is only a mile or so wide. The narrowest
of these straits are known as the Bosphorus and
the Dardanelles. For his 492 BC invasion, Darius
appointed one of his own son-in-laws to lead
the campaign, a young general named Mardonius.
He ordered him to cross into Europe with
a force of about 30,000 men, a small army
by Persian standards, designed to move
quickly and need minimal supplies. They
crossed at the straits known today as the
Dardanelles, but which in ancient times was
known as the Hellespont, or the Sea of
Helles, named after a mythical princess who
drowned after falling from a flying golden
ram in the myth of the golden fleece.
These straits are about three kilometers across
at their narrowest point, and Mardonius would
have ferried his men over using ships.
Once in Europe, Mardonius subjected the people of
Thrace in what is now Eastern Greece and Bulgaria,
and then marched south to the mountainous kingdom
of Macedon, which they also subjugated and made a
client state of the empire. With this large
Persian army now on the doorstep of mainland
Greece, Darius sent an offer to the cities of
Athens and Sparta, requesting that they lay down
their arms, swear allegiance to him, and give
him the customary offering of earth and water.
Herodotus recounts their reaction.
When Darius sent men with this purpose,
those who made the request were cast at the one
city into a pit, and at the other into a well,
and bidden to obtain their earth and
water for the king from these locations.
It's not clear from Herodotus whether these men
were killed or eventually fished out from the
well, but either way, mistreating a messenger
in this way was considered an abhorrent act in
Persia, and when Darius heard how his ambassadors
had been abused, it must have strengthened his
belief that he was dealing with the very worst
of barbarians, and steeled his resolve to crush
these tiny cities beneath his foot. But the
general Mardonius met with some bad luck on
the journey. His army was ambushed during
the night by a people known as the Brygi,
a Thracian tribe who killed many of his men.
Mardonius himself was even injured when he
was thrown from his horse during the battle,
and at the same time, another force sent by
ship across the Aegean was wrecked in a
storm off the rocky coast of Mount Athos.
It was the first intimation the Persians would get
that conquering Greece might
not be as easy as it seemed.
Not discouraged, two years later, Darius sent
another force of about 30,000 men on a fleet
of ships sailing for Athens. These hopped from
island to island across the Aegean, capturing
them for the empire. With them they brought men,
equipment, supplies, and horses, and even the old
tyrant ruler of Athens, Hippias, who they intended
to put back on the throne as a Persian puppet.
In early September of 490 BC, they
finally reached the coast of Attica,
the region in which Athens sits.
There, on the advice of Hippias, they
landed at a bay about forty kilometers, or twenty-five
miles, northeast of Athens at a place called Marathon.
When the Athenians heard of the Persian army's
landing, they gathered every single available
fighting man in the city, and marched out
to meet them. The Persians had chosen their
landing spot because the Bay of Marathon was
one of the few large open spaces in Attica.
It was a stretch of beach rising to a flat
plain before quickly shooting up to rocky
and impossible highlands broken by only a
couple of narrow passes. The Greeks knew
the area well, and quickly moved to shut
off the two main passes out of the bay.
From there they looked on as the Persian
expeditionary force unloaded on the sand.
Over the last fifty-six years of intermittent conflict,
no Greek army had ever beaten a Persian one in
battle, and this must have been playing through
their minds as they watched the Persian ships
landing one by one on the shore. For a time,
both armies stood and watched one another,
and neither were in a hurry to begin
the battle, as Herodotus recounts.
The Athenian generals were of divided
opinion, some advocating not fighting
because they were too few to attack the army
of the Persians; others advocating fighting.
While they stood and watched
their enemy mass on the beach,
the Athenians were joined by men from the city
of Plataea, and they had sent out word to other
allies. One of these messengers was a man by
the name of Pheidippides, who had set out on a
journey of more than 240 kilometers over rocky
mountainous terrain to ask for aid from the city of Sparta.
The Greeks had nothing like the sophisticated road
system of the Persian Empire, or the waystations
where horse riding messengers could swap out their
tired horses. The Greeks were mostly not great
horse riders, and when they did ride, they did so
without stirrups or a saddle, making for a slow and
uncomfortable ride. For this reason, if you wanted
a message delivered in Greece at this time, you
simply sent a runner who trained his whole life
for long-distance journeys of this kind.
Pheidippides must have known that countless lives,
and perhaps the freedom of his country, depended
on him making that journey swiftly. But when
he arrived in Sparta, he would be disappointed.
He reached Sparta on the very next day after
quitting the city of Athens. Upon his arrival,
he went before the rulers and
said to them, "Men of Sparta,
the Athenians beseech you to hasten
to their aid and not allow that state,
which is the most ancient in all Greece,
to be enslaved by the barbarians."
The Spartans wished to help the Athenians, but
were unable to, as it was then the ninth day of
the first decade, and they could not march out of
Sparta when the moon had not reached the full.
The Spartans were at that time celebrating
their annual festival of the Carneia, during which
campaigning was forbidden. Despite their carefully
cultivated reputation for never backing down from
a fight, it was surprisingly common whenever it
was called upon for the city of Sparta to have
something else terribly important to be doing. The
Spartans would not even leave Sparta for another
week, and the march would take them at least
another three days. Pheidippides set out on the road back
to Athens to bring the bad news of this delay to
the soldiers stuck back on the beach at Marathon.
Outnumbered at least two to one, the
Athenians elected to sit and wait
for the Spartan reinforcements to arrive,
but then something forced their hand. We're
not entirely sure why the battle began when it
did, before any Spartan reinforcements appeared,
but it's possible that the Persians had come
up with an idea. By now they had realized that
with every Athenian fighter waiting there
on the beach, blocking their way inland,
the city of Athens must be all but defenseless.
The Persians may have begun to load up their
ships, perhaps putting the horses on board first,
preparing to set sail for the city immediately.
Traveling by sea, they would be able to strike
at Athens before the Athenians were able to run
the twenty-five miles home by foot in their heavy
armor. Once they saw this Persian plan unfolding,
the Athenians had no choice but to attack right
away. They advanced, breaking into a run across
the marshy plain, and smashed into the lightly-
armored Persian infantry, as Herodotus recounts.
The two armies fought together on the plain of
Marathon for a length of time, and in the mid
battle, where the Persians themselves and the
Scythians had the place, the barbarians were
victorious, and broke and pursued the Greeks
into the inner country. But on the two wings,
the Athenians and the Plataeans defeated the
enemy. Having so done, they suffered the
rooted barbarians to fly at their ease, and
joining the two wings in one, fell upon those
who had broken their own center, and fought and
conquered them. These likewise fled, and now the
Athenians hung upon the runaways and cut them
down, chasing them all the way to the shore.
It's speculated that the Persian cavalry, either
half-loaded onto the boats already or simply
useless on the marshy plain, were unable to help
the trapped foot soldiers. The Persian forces were
routed, and Herodotus claims that many thousands
were killed on the beach. The Greeks managed to
capture seven of the Persian ships, but the rest
of the fleet escaped, and now attempted to play
the final card available to them, a last ditch
attempt to attack the undefended city of Athens.
The remainder of the barbarians pushed off, hoping to
reach Athens before the return of the Athenians,
but the Athenians, with all possible
speed, marched away to the defense of
their city, and succeeded in reaching Athens
before the appearance of the barbarians.
The Greeks had run half the afternoon
through the blazing sun at a distance of
just over twenty-five miles, about the distance
of what we today commemorate as a marathon.
When the Persians arrived off the coast
of Athens in the Bay of Phalerum, they saw
with some astonishment that the Athenians
had arrived back to defend their city, and
were now standing on the city walls with their
bright shields and helmets flashing in the sun.
The barbarian fleet arrived and laid off Phalerum,
which was at the time the harbor of Athens,
but after resting a while upon their oars,
they departed and sailed away to Asia.
The Battle of Marathon has long been considered
a turning point in the history of Athens.
Although the Persian army that Darius sent was
only a relatively small expeditionary force,
it had been beaten by a Greek army only half
its size. The Athenians had proven that they
could fight by themselves without the aid of
Sparta, and they had shown that by carefully
choosing the battlefield, the Persian forces,
previously thought unbeatable, could be overcome.
The Greek dead of Marathon were cremated, and their
ashes buried on the battlefield beneath two great
mounds of earth. On the tomb of the Athenians,
the poet Simonides wrote the following epigraph.
Fighting at the forefront of the Greeks,
the Athenians at Marathon laid
low the army of the gilded Medes.
Two days after the battle, Herodotus
describes how 2,000 Spartans arrived
on the beach at Marathon and
saw the mounds of the dead.
After the full moon, 2,000 Spartans came to
Athens. Although they came too late for the
battle, they desired to see the Persians,
so they went to Marathon and saw them,
and they departed again, praising
the Athenians and their achievement.
For the Spartans, the fact that Athens
had fought and won without them would
be a sore point that would last for at least
the next decade. As for the great King Darius,
when news reached him of the defeat
at Marathon, we can only imagine the
frosty atmosphere at court. Herodotus
renders one version of his reaction.
The message about the Battle of Marathon came to
King Darius, so he was now more furious than ever
and even more resolved to march against Greece.
He immediately sent messengers to each city,
ordering them to prepare a much larger
force than before, as well as ships,
horses, grain, and vessels. As a result of
these demands, Asia was astir for three
years, with the best men enrolled for service
against Greece and getting ready for war.
But by the time this massive force
was ready to set sail for Greece,
events in the empire overtook the great king.
Darius' increasing demands for men and grain to
service his Greek wars had caused resentment
in the various satrapies of the empire, and
especially in Egypt. The defeat at Marathon
may also have emboldened some who wished to
break free of the empire. Now around 486 BC,
Egypt rose up against its Persian governor.
The army that Darius had gathered to conquer
Greece now sailed for Egypt instead. Darius,
now a relatively old man of sixty-five, prepared to
go with them, but before he could depart,
the king was taken suddenly ill. The Greek
writer Ctesias records the final days of Darius.
Darius went back to Persia and made two sacrifices,
and after an illness of thirty days, he passed away.
Darius had been king for thirty-six years, and though
his rule had started in scandal and lies,
he had ushered in an era of stability and
strength. Across the empire, Persians mourned
for their king. They put out their sacred fires
in recognition of their grief, shaved their heads,
and clipped the manes of their horses as a
sign of respect. On his tomb at Naqsh-i Rustam,
Darius had carved an illustration of his throne,
supported from beneath by row upon row of people,
each dressed in a distinctive fashion of one
of the peoples of the empire, and alongside it,
he wrote the following inscription
that would serve as his epitaph.
If now you shall think how many other countries
which King Darius held, look at the sculptures
who bear the throne; then shall you know the
spear of a Persian man has gone forth far. Then
shall it become known to you a Persian man
has delivered battle far indeed from Persia.
The throne of the empire now passed
to one of the oldest sons of Darius,
a man who in Old Persian was named Kh-sha-yarsha,
a name which means ‘he who rules over heroes’,
but the Greeks would call him Xerxes.
In the days that followed, this Xerxes
would have traveled to Pasargadae,
the old capital of Cyrus, to be crowned,
and there he would enter the sanctuary
of the goddess Anahita. Plutarch describes
the ceremony that would have ensued inside.
There is a temple dedicated to a warlike goddess.
The royal person to be initiated must enter it,
must strip himself of his own robe, and put on the
one that Cyrus I wore before he was king.
Then, having devoured a cake of figs, he must chew
turpentine resin and drink a cup of sour milk.
This ritual was supposed to remind each new king
of the hard life that the founder of the empire
had lived and the meager foods he had subsisted
on while on campaign, a ceremony designed to
remind them that being king involved hardship
and sacrifice. When he left that sanctuary,
Xerxes was the new King of Kings, King of the
Four Quarters of the World, and emperor of
the Persians. Perhaps throughout this ceremony,
while the priests chanted their songs around him,
his father's last words to him would
have echoed in his head. We will never
know what those might have been, but given the
choices that Xerxes would make during his rule,
it might not be far-fetched to imagine
that Darius had made his son promise him
that no matter what, he would make the
Athenians pay for what they had done.
When Xerxes got to the throne, the first six years
of his reign was spent crushing the revolt still
ongoing in Egypt, and then putting down another two
that arose in Babylon. But the moment his empire
was secure, he turned his sights on the prize that
had slipped from his father's grasp, and where the
empire's great humiliation had taken place. In the
spring of 480 BC, the army of Xerxes was ready,
a large force of perhaps 60 to 80,000 soldiers,
more than twice the size of the army that had
been beaten at Marathon. At the head of these men,
he marched out from the Lydian capital of Sardis
and towards the crossing of the Hellespont. With
him, he brought a man with direct experience of
fighting in Greece, the general that had led his
father's campaign, the now middle-aged Mardonius.
To cross the narrow sea channel of
the Hellespont, Xerxes ordered a
remarkable piece of infrastructure to be
built; two great floating pontoon bridges,
each made out of more than 300 ships tied
together with ropes of flax and papyrus,
and with a wooden road surface laid across them.
These bridges even had canvas screens on either
side so that the horses would not become scared
at the sight of the rocking waters beneath them.
These bridges would stretch more than 1.4
kilometers across the waters of the Hellespont,
making them the longest bridges that the world
had ever seen, and they crossed a stretch of sea
that experiences some of the strongest currents
in the Mediterranean. It was a clear statement
of the empire's ambition, resources, and
determination to crush their enemies.
But the weather would conspire
against Xerxes’ ambition,
and Herodotus describes one
account of his furious reaction.
But no sooner had the strait been bridged
than a great storm swept down and broke
and scattered all the work. When Xerxes heard
of that, he was very angry and gave command
that the Hellespont be scourged with 300 lashes,
and a pair of fetters be thrown into the sea.
“Thou bitter water,” they should say. “Our master
thus punishes thee, because thou didst him wrong.”
This legend of Xerxes ordering the sea
to be whipped is likely a Greek tale
designed to make the king look despotic and
ridiculous, and in fact, with everything we
know about the Persian reverence for water,
it seems incredibly unlikely. We can be sure
that Xerxes would have offered prayers and
offerings to the waters before crossing them,
and perhaps it is a Greek misunderstanding of
these ceremonies that Herodotus is recounting.
For much of the story that follows, for better
or worse, Herodotus is our only source. He was
certainly interested in portraying the truth
of past events, but he was also trying to tell
a ripping story that glorified the exploits ofthe
Greeks. Herodotus was writing about fifty years
after the Persian Wars, and by that time, this
conflict had taken on epic proportions in the
Greek imagination. To the Greeks, the Persian
Wars held a similar place as the Second World
War to us today, a great clash between good and
evil, a fight over the nature of civilization,
and the fiery conflict in which the world as
they knew it had been born. For this reason,
the account of Herodotus is a crucial source,
but one that has to be treated very carefully.
With his bridges suitably repaired,
Xerxes marched into Europe, and there
he would meet with remarkable success. He
marched through his subject of Thrace, and
received help from his allies in
Macedon, a king named Alexander.
Xerxes was marching to war, but he was also
demonstrating the power and breadth of his empire.
He ensured that his army was made up of one
unit from every one of the empire's provinces,
a colorful and garish display that would
have had a simple message; the entire world
is marching against Greece. You are either with me
or against me. From Macedon, Xerxes marched south,
his army moving in three columns, each with
a separate route so they wouldn't clog the
road. They made such an impressive sight that many
generations later, the local Thracians still pointed
out to travelers the road along which the great
army had traveled. The size of the force was such
that Greek writers like Herodotus would inflateit
to the absurd size of two or three million men, but
modern analysis of the constraints of supply and
transport in the ancient world reckon that about
100,000 soldiers is a reasonable estimate for the
maximum possible size of an army at this time.
Along the way, the engineers of Xerxes improved
the roads and built bridges, cutting through the
mountains and bending the landscape to his will.
At the peninsula of Mount Athos, where one of his
father's fleets had been wrecked in a storm,
Xerxes ordered the digging of a mile-long canal
that cut through the isthmus and allowed his ships
to avoid sailing around the dangerous headland.
On the way, Herodotus describes with perhaps
some exaggeration the army draining lakes dry
while watering their pack animals, but it's true
that supplying this great army was no easy task.
For that reason, they never strayed far from the
sea, where the Persian navy was able to support
them and continually bring food and fodder for
the animals. Behind them, an ants’ trail of supply
carts must have led back along the road, bringing
supplies over from their crucial bridges of boats,
and supply depots that had been set up years
in advance fed the soldiers on their march.
On their way, Herodotus describes the Persians
suffering problems with the local Greek wildlife.
As Xerxes thus marched, lions attacked
the camels that carried his provisions.
Nightly they would come down out
of their lairs and made havoc.
Despite these challenges, Xerxes' army
soon passed the towering gray rock faces
of Mount Olympus, and marched south into
the large fertile plains of Thessaly.
Ahead of his advance he sent messengers
to the northern Greek regions and cities,
demanding that they give him
offerings of earth and water.
Many Greeks did so, and thereby went over to
the Persian side. These included the Greeks
of Thessaly and Thebes, who hated the Athenians,
and even the people of the sacred center of Delphi.
Some of these Greeks must have felt
that they had no other choice when
faced with the might of Persia,
while others may have reveled in
the opportunity to shift the dominance
of Athens and Sparta in the Greek world.
Others chose their stance simply due to petty
rivalries within Greece, as Herodotus describes.
The Phocians alone of all that region
would not take the Persians’ side,
and that for no other reason than their hatred
of the Thessalians. Had the Thessalians aided
the Greek side, then the Phocians would
certainly have stood for the Persians.
But to Athens and Sparta, King
Xerxes sent no messengers,
remembering bitterly how they had mistreated his
father's ambassadors a generation earlier. The
Greeks who chose to stand up to the empire
were now outnumbered. They needed to find a
way to gain an advantage, and they would
do this by using the landscape of Greece
itself, a landscape of mountainous
highlands broken by narrow passes.
Xerxes and his army were following the sea
shore, staying close to their supply ships,
and their route would take them along one narrow
passage between the sea and the mountains.
As the summer came to an end, this was the
place that the allied Greeks chose to defend
the whole of the south, a place about 200 kilometers
northwest of Athens at a site called Thermopylae.
Herodotus describes their deliberation.
The Greeks consulted together how
and where they should stand to fight.
The council that prevailed was that they
should guard the pass of Thermopylae,
for they saw that it was narrower thanthe pass
into Thessaly, and moreover, nearer home.
The name Thermopylae means ‘hot gates’, so named for
the sulfurous thermal springs that rise up out
of the earth nearby. One legend has it that the
waters here are hot because it was here that the
hero Heracles had tried to wash off the poison of
the fearsome Hydra. Today, the battlefield looks
very different, since silt buildup from the
nearby Spercheios River has pushed back the
ancient coastline and created a wide plane where
once a rocky bay stood. But in ancient times,
the sea would have lapped close up to the sheer-
sided slope of Mount Kallidromos, creating a number
of narrow bottlenecks which the Greeks called
gates. In ancient times, the Phocian people had
built a wall at the pass of Thermopylae to keep
out the hated Thessalians, a rivalry that still
burned to that day. But now this crumbling Phocian
wall would help repel a much different enemy.
The Greeks hoped that with 20 to 30,000 heavily
armored hoplites holding the pass of Thermopylae,
the Persians would have no hope but to turn back,
but things would not go according to their plan.
This was partly because August
was the Greek season of leisure.
The harvest had been brought in. The
days were long and languid, and the
Olympic festival was taking place across Greece.
This was a religious celebration of the king
of the gods, Zeus, combined with a series
of athletic challenges held at the religious
sanctuary of Olympia every four years. Greeks
had long observed a truce during the games so that
athletes and religious pilgrims could travel the
roads without fear, and no one wanted to go to war
during the festival. In their rocky peninsula, the
Spartans were once again celebrating their annual
festival of the Carneia when military campaigning
was officially restricted. Perhaps if the Greeks
had realized how quickly the Persian army was
advancing, they would have felt more urgency to
rush to the battlefield, as Herodotus describes.
They intended, when they had celebrated the Carneian
festival, to leave a garrison in Sparta and hasten
in full force to join the army. The rest of
the allies also intended to act similarly,
for it had happened that the Olympic
festival fell exactly at this same period.
None of them looked to see the contest
at Thermopylae decided so speedily.
But rebuilding the Phocian wall would take time,
and they wanted to make sure it was ready when
the main army arrived. To secure the pass
and begin the work of rebuilding this wall,
the Spartans bent the rules and sent
a small unit of only 300 soldiers
led by a son of King Cleomenes, a man whose
name meant ‘son of the lion’. His name was Leonidas.
Leonidas and his small contingent were to rendezvous
at Thermopylae with a number of soldiers gathered
from other Greek allies, totaling about 7,000
men, and ensure that no Persian advance party
slipped through the pass. It was not a large
army, but it wasn't small either. In fact,
it was only a few thousand smaller than the
force that had beat the Persians at Marathon.
But Xerxes' army had moved
faster than anyone realized.
The Persians arrived at the pass of
Thermopylae in early August to find
only this small holding force stationed between
the mountains and the sea, blocking their way.
The Greeks under Leonidas were taken completely
by surprise, and an awkward standoff ensued.
At first, Xerxes didn't believe that the Greeks
actually intended to fight in this narrow pass.
They were outnumbered as much as ten to one, and
in fact, the Persian king waited there for four days,
expecting the Greeks to withdraw. But on
the fourth day, they were still there,
blocking his only path. Frustrated at the lack
of progress, Xerxes ordered his men to attack.
But the Greeks were perfectly suited to this
kind of warfare. Greek hoplites were heavily
armored and carried large round shields, fighting
in a shield wall with long, seven-foot spears that kept
their enemy at bay. On an open battlefield, they
were naturally weak to cavalry and vulnerable to
being surrounded, but in the narrow paths
of Thermopylae, these weaknesses evaporated,
and they simply refused to budge. Persian
warriors on the whole were lightly equipped,
designed to move fast and travel long distances
across the empire to fight wherever they were
needed. They were also from a culture with nomadic
warrior roots that may have viewed the heavy armor
of the Greeks as an expression of cowardice. The
Greeks in turn looked down on the Persian tactics,
and considered the bow and arrow to be a cowardly
weapon. Herodotus describes the ensuing combat.
When the Persians moved forward and attacked the
Greeks, there fell many of them, and others kept
coming up continually. And during these onsets,
it is said that the king, looking on, three times
leapt up from his seat, struck with fear for
his army. Next, the Persians tried to pelt the
Greeks with arrows to weaken their position,
but this bombardment only rained down on the
broad shields of the hoplites, and soon the
Greeks were even cracking jokes about it.
The Spartan Dienekes is said to have proved
himself the best man of all. Being informed
by one of the men of Trachis that when
the barbarians discharged their arrows,
they obscured the light of the sun by
the multitude of the arrows, he was not
dismayed by this. He said that their guest
from Trachis brought them very good news,
for if the Medes obscured the light of the sun,
the battle against them would be in the shade.
The fighting went on for three days. Throughout
this time, the Greeks rotated out the men who
fought at the front of their lines so they
didn't become exhausted, and by this time,
Xerxes' frustration must have grown to genuine
concern. The pass of Thermopylae had been held to
great effect by only 7,000 men, and he began to
realize that if the main force of Greeks arrived,
probably three or four times that number, it
might hold out forever, and his invasion of Greece
would stop right there on the rocky shore of the
Malian Gulf. But in the end, Xerxes would prevail,
and his victory would come not at the tip of
a spear but with Persian experience, at the
careful and meticulous gathering of intelligence.
Wherever they went, they were adept at developing
a network of spies and informers, and everywhere
the flash of Persian gold, each coin stamped with
the symbol of an archer, paved the way to
the information they needed. At Thermopylae,
they soon found a local man who was able to
show them another pass through the mountains,
concealed with forests of oak. Ephialtes,
the son of Eurydemus, came to Xerxes and was
admitted to a conference. Stirred by the hope
of receiving a rich reward at the king's hands,
he had come to tell him of the pathway which
led across the mountain to Thermopylae, by which
disclosure he brought destruction on the band of
Greeks, who had there withstood the barbarians.
This path would allow them to cut off,
surround, and utterly destroy the army,
blocking the Thermopylae Pass. When
the Greeks heard of the Persian plan,
they saw that they would be surrounded, and
King Leonidas knew that the battle was lost.
He ordered the rest of the army to retreat,
and stayed behind with his royal bodyguard and
some assorted Thespian and Theban allies
to hold the pass a little while longer.
This was an act of personal bravery
by the Spartans who remained, but it
was also a tactical necessity.
If the whole army retreated,
Persian heavy cavalry would have pursued
them and likely cut them down to a man.
Spartan hoplites had also been raised within
a brutal warrior culture that demanded their
sacrifice in battle. Men who returned from
losing battles were often treated as cowards
and shunned in Spartan society. Even two men
who Leonidas sent away from Thermopylae due
to injuries were treated as outcasts when they
returned to the city, as Herodotus describes.
When Aristodemus returned to Sparta, reproach and
disgrace awaited him. No Spartan would give him
a light to kindle his fire, or so much as address
a word to him. All spoke of him as the coward.
Another of the 300 is likewise said to have
survived the battle, a man named Pantites. He,
they said, on his return to Sparta found himself
in such disesteem that he hanged himself.
For Xerxes, the battle at Thermopylae had been
a resounding victory. He had surprised his
enemy before their reinforcements were able to
arrive, outmaneuvered them on their home soil,
and forced them to retreat from the choke point
they had hoped to defend. And, thrown into the
bargain, he had cut off and killed one of the
two kings of Sparta, meaning that a child now
sat on one of its thrones. For the Greeks,
Thermopylae was a sorry defeat tactically and
strategically, but virtually from the moment the
battle ended, they began putting it to another
purpose; that was of propaganda. The legend of the
heroic last stand of Leonidas would be repeated
over and over, and used as a rallying call to
other Greeks to fight against the Persians.
Herodotus himself was so inspired
by the story of the battle that
he claimed to have memorized the names of
all 300 of the Spartans who fought there.
Leonidas fell fighting bravely, together with
many other famous Spartans, whose names I have
taken care to learn on account of their great
worthiness, as indeed I have those of all the 300.
At the same time that the battle of Thermopylae
was going on, the Greek fleet had also clashed
with the Persian navy at the nearby straits of
Artemisium, and on the sea, the contest was
a little more even. Both sides took heavy
losses, but the heavily outnumbered Greek
fleet was forced to retreat when they heard
about the defeat at Thermopylae. Their ships
were scattered, and limped home to the island of
Salamis, which sits just off the Athenian coast.
With the final choke point on
the way to Athens now overcome,
the Persian army eagerly advanced into southern
Greece, looting and burning as they went.
The Athenians hoped that the Spartans would help
defend their city, but they would be disappointed.
Sparta withdrew all its forces right back to the
Peloponnese peninsula, where they began building
a wall across its narrow isthmus of Corinth,
trying to achieve there what they had failed
to do at Thermopylae. But that meant that the
city of Athens was left all but defenseless.
Realizing that they were now alone, the
Athenians fled the city. The refugees
boarded ships and escaped to the nearby island
of Salamis, leaving Athens a ghost town.
They made a proclamation that
every Athenian should save his
children and servants as he best
could. Thereupon most of them sent
the members of their households to
Troezen, and some to Aegina and Salamis.
The Persians swept into the deserted city,
killed a few determined defenders holed up in
the Acropolis, and burned Athens to the ground.
Its tightly packed houses of wood and mud-brick
burned swiftly. The burning of
Sardis had finally been avenged.
Xerxes must have been delighted. In
only four months, he had achieved
the dream of his father, and now stood
upon the smoldering ruins of Athens.
His invasion had been a roaring success,
and his enemies now scattered before him.
All he needed to do was round on the now isolated
city of Sparta, break through their makeshift
Corinthian wall, and crush them completely. At
the sight of the Persian army on the horizon,
it's likely that Sparta's helot underclass would
have taken the opportunity to rebel, and facing
their enemies from within and without, the last
independent power in Greece would have fallen.
But this Xerxes didn't do.
Instead, he made an enormous mistake. Against
the advice of one of his chief naval commanders,
a queen named Artemisia of Halicarnassus, he ordered
his fleet to round on the island of Salamis, where
the Athenian refugees were sheltering, and destroy
what remained of the Greek ships harbored there.
This Greek fleet had actually been
built only three years earlier, on the
urging of a particular Athenian statesman
named Themistocles, as Herodotus recounts.
Now there was a certain Athenian, by name
Themistocles, who had lately risen to be among
their chief men. Themistocles persuadedthe
Athenians to build two hundred ships of war,
compelling the Athenians to become sailors.
These ships were of the latest design,
large and heavy warships that dwarfed the
smaller Persian ships, but they were also
drastically outnumbered by the Persian
fleet, which had perhaps five hundred vessels.
Now sure of victory, the Persians
sailed in and descended on the
scattered Athenians, but things
would not go to Xerxes' plan.
Once again, the Greeks chose their battlefield
well. In the cramped straits of Salamis,
the Persian warships were forced to cram together,
preventing their oars from moving. Meanwhile,
the Greeks knew the winds and currents of
these waters; some of them would have been
sailing and fishing there since they were
children. They rammed into the flanks of the
trapped Persian fleet to devastating effect.
The playwright Aeschylus, likely an
eyewitness of the battle and who
would lose his brother in the fighting, would
write the following description of the carnage.
When the mass of their ships had been crowded in
the narrows, and none could render another aid,
and each crashed its bronze prow against
each of its own line. They splintered
their whole bank of oars. Then the Greek galleys
hemmed them in and battered them on every
side. The shores and reefs were crowded
with dead, and every ship that formed a
part of the barbarian fleet plied its
oars in disorderly flight. Groans and
shrieks together filled the open sea until
the face of black night hid the scene.
The battle of Salamis was a disaster.
Among the dead were several of Xerxes'
own brothers and countless Persian noblemen
from the court of Persepolis. When news reached
the Persians of what had happened,
Herodotus imagines their reaction.
When the first message came to Susa,
telling that Xerxes had taken Athens,
it gave such delight to the Persians who were
left at home that they strewed all the roads
with myrtle boughs and burnt incense and
gave themselves up to sacrificial feasts
and jollity. But the second message,
coming on the heels of the first,
so confounded them that they all rent their
tunics and cried and lamented without ceasing.
Once the dust of the battle had settled,
Xerxes must have realized the enormity
of his mistake. His fleet was a crucial
element in his invasion. With it destroyed,
his army now had no way of getting
supplies from the Persian mainland,
and they feared being stranded in
Europe, as Herodotus describes.
When Xerxes was aware of the
calamity that had befallen him,
he feared lest the Greeks might sail
to the Hellespont to break his bridges,
and he might be cut off in Europe and in
peril of his life. And so, he planned to flee.
Xerxes soon departed, and took more than
half of his army with him. His most capable
troops he left in the care of the veteran
general Mardonius and took the rest north,
crossing back over his bridges of boats.
The reasons for this departure we can
never know. Herodotus paints a picture
of a cowardly king fleeing in panic, but
it may not have looked like this from the
Persian side. They had achieved virtually all
of their war aims, and the king had to return
home to participate in the ceremonial calendar of
Persian royalty. He may have assumed that the war
was simply over. But regardless, the king's
departure certainly emboldened the Greeks.
In 479 BC, the Greek allies were able to amass
an enormous force, perhaps the largest Greek
army ever gathered, and marched out to meet
the Persians, who were still camped in the
ruins of Athens. When he heard that this army
was approaching, the Persian general Mardonius
ordered that everything left standing in the
city be torn down to the very foundations.
Then he retreated to a wide plain at a place
called Plataea. There, the combined forces of
Athens and Sparta converged on the Persians and
the 20 to 30,000 Greek allies who fought alongside
them. Now surrounded, exhausted, and cut off from
their supplies, and with their king departed for
home, the Persians were finally overcome. So long
as Mardonius was alive, the Persians stood their
ground and defended themselves, overthrowing
many Spartans. But when Mardonius was slain,
and his guards, who were the strongest part of the
army, then the rest, too, yielded and gained ground.
The Persian army retreated from
the battle to their fortified camp,
which the Greeks surrounded.
They breached the walls and
began a general slaughter that left few
alive. The general Mardonius was killed.
From this moment on, the Persian force that
Xerxes had brought to Greece was no more,
and all Persian attempts to conquer
the Greek mainland came to an end.
But Xerxes, for his part, put a typical Persian
spin on the situation. On one of his
inscriptions he had carved at Persepolis,
he includes one oblique reference that many
think refers to this disastrous campaign.
When I became king, there was one among
the countries which was in disorder.
By the favor of Ahura Mazda, I overwhelmed
that country and put it in its proper place.
Despite Xerxes' attempts to spin it, the defeat
in Greece was not a minor setback for the empire.
Persia had marched across the Hellespont with a
huge force of men brought from every corner of
its domain, and these had been all but eradicated.
In every part of the empire, wives and mothers and
children would now mourn the men who never came
home. In Egypt, women let their hair fall loose
and scattered sand on their heads as incense
drifted through the streets. In Babylon, wives
tore their robes and sat in silence with ash on
their faces. In Media, riders wore black wool and
led their horses unbridled through the streets, and
everywhere the empire's failure would have been
understood. Even in the Persian royal court, a
significant period of mourning must have followed.
Xerxes' own sister was the wife of the general
Mardonius, who he had abandoned to fight at Plataea,
and a multitude of courtiers now lay at the
bottom of the Bay of Salamis. The campaign
was a strategic disaster, too. For the next fifty
years, the Persian Empire would have to contend
with the fleets of the emboldened Greek states
buzzing like hornets around its western fringes,
and whenever a rebellion flared up anywhere in
Persia, the Greeks made sure to support it. But
the blow was far from a fatal one, and in fact,
the Persian Empire continued to flourish for
another 150 years, and during this time, it
continued to export its influence overseas.
Over the next decades, while the Greeks rebuilt
their devastated cities, they regaled each other
with tales of the Persian Wars, now as momentous
in their minds as the Trojan War once had been.
The playwright Aeschylus, himself a veteran
of many of the battles, delighted Athenian
audiences by putting words into the
mouth of Xerxes himself in his play
The Persians, which he debuted only
eight years after the Battle of Salamis.
Alas, wretched I am, who have met this cruel
doom, which did not give the faintest sign
of its coming. In what savage mood has
fortune trampled upon the Persian race?
What misery is yet in store for me?
Unhappy wretch. The land bewails her
native youth, slaughtered for Xerxes, who has
crowded the underworld with Persian slain.
But as much as they enjoyed stories of their
underdog victory, throughout the decades that
followed, Greeks, and especially Athenians,
began to develop a taste for Persian things.
One of the biggest influences on Athens was in
the realm of fashion. By the middle of the fifth
century BC, we can see from painted vases
that clothes with sleeves began to appear
on Athenian streets, patterned in Persian styles.
Some of these garments were made in Athens, but
others were actually imported from Persia itself.
Archaeologists have found traces of Indian cotton
and Chinese silk in Athenian graves beginning
around this time, showing that Persian goods were
flowing into the city in record amounts. Athenians
also began wearing Persian-style slippers on their
feet. In his work, A History of the Pelonponnesian
War, Thucydides criticizes the Athenian love of
these Eastern fashions. The Athenians were the
first to lay aside their weapons and to adopt an
easier and more luxurious mode of life. Indeed,
their rich old men had the luxury of wearing
undergarments of linen and fastening a knot of
their hair with a tie of golden grasshoppers.
For a long time, Greeks had particularly mocked
the Persian custom of carrying parasols to
protect themselves from the sun, but in
the decades following the Persian Wars,
wealthy Greeks in Athens themselves began
carrying parasols, and for the especially
wealthy Athenians, they imitated Persian kings in
having their slaves carry the parasols for them.
It has even been suggested that when the
Greeks rebuilt the Parthenon at the heart
of the Athenian Acropolis on top of the
rubble left by the Persians, the Athenians
imitated the styles of the palaces of Persia,
in particular the Persepolis friezes. Just like
the palace of Persepolis, the Parthenon Marbles
show all the peoples of the Athenian lands,
bringing goods and tribute to the great
city. It's possible that the craftsmen
they brought in to do the work had also honed
their craft while working on Persian palaces.
The great King Xerxes never let go of
his obsession. Over the next decade,
he gathered another army and fleet in
order to crush what was now an open
rebellion among Greek city-states all
along the western coast of his empire.
But these forces were destroyed in the battle
of Eurymedon in 469 BC, a daring strike by the
Greeks that actually took place in
Persian lands, as Thucydides recounts.
The Athenians won both battles on the same
day, and captured and destroyed the whole
Phoenician fleet, consisting of 200 vessels. This
battle was a symptom of just how emboldened the
Greeks had now become. Perhaps it was this final
defeat that would have turned Xerxes away from
Greece forever, but we will never know. That's
because four years later, in the autumn of 465 BC,
a commander of the king's bodyguard
named Artabanus conspired along with
a palace eunuch to seize the throne,
as the Greek writer Ctesias recounts.
Artabanus, the commander of the
god, plotted against Xerxes.
He went in by night to the king's
chamber and slew him while he slept.
The son and heir of Xerxes, named Darius, was
also killed in the violence that suddenly
engulfed the palace. When the conspiracy
was discovered, another of Xerxes' sons
drew his sword and came to revenge his father. He
managed to kill the plotting eunuch and the general
Artabanus, and foil their plan. This man's
name in Old Persian was Artakh-shathra, or
‘he who holds power through truth’. But in Greek
he would come to be known as Artaxerxes.
King Artaxerxes seems to have had a
quite different temperament to his rash
and vengeful father, Xerxes. We can see
this demonstrated in the story of the
incredible career of one Athenian Greek
who had been instrumental in the defeat
of Xerxes only thirty years earlier. That was the
Athenian statesman and admiral, Themistocles.
Themistocles was the man who had first convinced
the Athenians to build a fleet, and he had
commanded it during the pivotal battle of
Salamis. He was perhaps the one man most
responsible for repelling the Persian invasion,
but in the years since, Themistocles had fallen
out of favor in Athens. Eventually, its citizens
voted to ostracize him from the city, a kind of
exile. Humiliated and outcast, Themistocles then
left Greece. But instead of fading into obscurity,
he took the decision to travel to Persia, where
he presented himself at the court of the son of
his great enemy, King Artaxerxes. This was
an especially daring move, because in Persia,
Themistocles actually had a bounty on his head
set at 200 talents, or more than five metric tons
of silver. But when Themistocles presented
himself before the new Persian King of Kings,
Artaxerxes seemed more amused
than anything, as Plutarch recounts.
When he had come into the king's presence, the
king welcomed him and spake him kindly, and said
he already owed the Greek 200 talents;
for since he had delivered himself up,
it was only just that he should receive
the reward proclaimed for his capture.
The king next asked Themistocles to
explain why he had come before him,
but the Greek apologized that he had
not yet learned the Persian language.
Themistocles answered that the speech of man
was like embroidered tapestries, since when it
was rolled up, it concealed and distorted
its patterns. For this reason, he had need
of time. Themistocles asked for a year, and
in that time he learned the Persian language
sufficiently to have interviews with the
king by himself, without interpreters.
Themistocles soon became a trusted adviser
to the Persian king, and over the next six
or seven years, taught him how to deal
with his Greek enemies. And perhaps
partly due to the advice of the man who
had once destroyed his father's fleet,
Artaxerxes struck upon a new
way of handling the Greek problem.
By this time, the Athenians were becoming
so bold that they were actually supporting
a rebellion in Egypt, clearly aiming to break the
Persian Empire apart piece by piece. In response,
Artaxerxes began a policy so simple
and effective that it's remarkable no
Persian king had thought of it before.
He began pouring funds towards Athens'
enemies in Greece, and the greatest rival
of Athens was, of course, Sparta. The Greek
writer Thucydides wrote the following
description of what happened next.
For a short time, the Greek league held together
‘til the Spartans and Athenians quarreled, and
made war upon each other with their allies,
a duel into which all the Greeks sooner or
later were drawn, though some might at first
remain neutral. So that the whole period from
the Persian War to this, with some peaceful
intervals, was spent by each power in war.
This conflict would become known as the Peloponnesian
War, and it would rage for nearly three decades
after 431 BC. During all this time, the Persians
made sure to put all of their resources at
Sparta's disposal, and in exchange, the Greeks
were willing to give the Persians concessions
that up to that point had seemed unthinkable.
They would soon relinquish any claim to the Greek
cities in Asia Minor, as the following treaty
proposed between Persia and Sparta states.
"Whatever country or cities the king has
or the king's ancestors had shall be the
kings, and whatever came into the Athenians from
these cities, either money or any other thing,
the king and the Spartans shall jointly hinder
the Athenians from receiving. The war with the
Athenians shall be carried on jointly by the
king and by the Spartans and their allies.”
Sparta had always been a land
power and had hardly any navy,
something that put them at a disadvantage to
the Athenians in war, but the Persians funded
the construction of a large fleet
for Sparta to match the Athenians
at sea and to ensure that the war
dragged on for as long as possible.
Some decades later, during the Corinthian
war that followed, the Persians would in
turn fund the Athenians to build a new fleet
of their own to destroy a Spartan fleet that
the Persians had also funded. While this policy
may have seemed circular and a little ridiculous,
it successfully kept the major cities of
Greece occupied, fighting one another.
Never again would they marshal the kind of united
force that had defeated the Persians at Plataea.
One Spartan king would later remark bitterly that
the Greeks had been defeated by 10,000
Persian archers, meaning not an army,
but the symbol of an archer that the empire
stamped on each one of its gold coins.
With this shrewd foreign policy,
the Persian Empire's western border
finally achieved a level of stability.
Artaxerxes ruled for forty-one years, longer
than either of the more famous kings
Darius or Xerxes, and his rule was arguably
more successful. His shrewd foreign policy
coupled with domestic stability, and the empire
flourished. But after his death in 424 BC,
the trouble began. His son, Xerxes II, would
rule for only forty-five days before two of his
brothers plotted to depose him. One of these
brothers, named Sogdianus, took the throne, but
ruled for only six months before himself being
deposed. The empire returned to some degree
of stability during the twenty-year reign of King
Darius II, but when he died in 404 BC, it would
once more return to a bloody and destructive
state of civil war. This conflict came about
due to a rivalry between two of Darius' sons; his
eldest son, Arses, and the youngest son, Cyrus.
While Arses had always been favored by his father
the king as a thoughtful and pragmatic young man,
Cyrus was the most beloved of their mother,
as the Greek writer Xenophon records.
Darius had two sons. The elder was
named Arses and the younger Cyrus. Now,
as Darius lay sick and felt that the end of
life drew near, he wished both his sons to be
with him. But Cyrus' mother had more love
for Cyrus than for Arses upon his throne.
When Darius died, his chosen heir,
Arses, became king and took on the
throne name Artaxerxes II. But his
brother Cyrus would not be satisfied.
Artaxerxes soon uncovered a plot by Cyrus
to kill him and take the throne for himself.
Artaxerxes had his brother arrested and dragged
before the court to answer for himself. Everyone
expected Cyrus to be executed for his crime,
but at the last moment, their mother intervened.
She threw herself before the king and pleaded for
her favorite son's life. Artaxerxes laid hands
upon Cyrus, desiring to put him to death,
but his mother made intercession for him,
and instead he sent him back again in
safety to his province. Cyrus then,
having so escaped through peril and dishonor,
fell to considering not only how he might avoid
ever again being in his brother's power, but how,
if possible, he might become king in his stead.
Back in his home province, Cyrus
began gathering an army in secret.
This force would include 20,000 warriors
of his own, but he knew this wouldn't be
enough. To supplement his forces, he hired 12,000
mercenaries. Of these, 10,000 were Greek hoplites
come to sell their spears in Persia. With the
addition of these Greeks, the would-be usurper
Cyrus now commanded the largest army of hoplites
anywhere in the world, twice the size of the
Spartan army at the time. Among these 10,000
was the Greek writer and adventurer, Xenophon.
Once the war began, Xenophon and his 10,000 men
marched across Persia under the command of Cyrus.
On his journey, Xenophon was impressed by the
sights of the empire; among them, several pontoon
bridges of the kind that the Persians excelled
in, and a number of Persian garden paradises.
Thus, Cyrus set out from Sardis and marched
on and on through Lydia to the river Maeander.
That river is 200 feet broad, but was spanned by
a bridge consisting of seven boats. Crossing it,
he marched to Celaenae, a popular city, large
and prosperous. Here Cyrus owned a palace
and a large park full of wild beasts, which
he used to hunt on horseback whenever he
wished to give himself or his horses exercise.
Through the midst of the park flows the river.
The usurper Cyrus finally met his brother
in battle at a place called Cunaxa.
There, in the midst of the melee, he
saw the king Artaxerxes. Cyrus
charged into the thick of the
fighting, as Xenophon describes.
With the cry of “I see the man,” Cyrus rushed
upon him and struck him in the breast, and
wounded him through his breastplate. While Cyrus
was delivering his stroke, however, someone hit
him with a hard blow under the eye with a javelin;
and then followed a struggle between the king and
Cyrus and the attendants who supported each
of them. While reeling from this wound, Cyrus
was stabbed in the leg, and fell to the ground
where his head struck a stone, and he was killed.
Xenophon's Greeks had carried themselves well
in the battle, but now with the usurper dead,
his cause died with him. His army scattered
in all directions, and the Greeks had to flee
back westwards as fast as they could,
with the Persians chasing close behind.
The war of the brothers was over, but Artaxerxes’
reign, although a long one at forty-six years,
was to be a troubled one. Egypt successfully
rebelled against him at the start of his rule,
and his attempts to retake it would fail. In
fact, Egypt would leave the empire entirely
for a full sixty years. This imperial failure
emboldened others, and soon further rebellions
spread all around the empire. One of these,
known as the Great Satrap’s Revolt, saw western
satrapies in Asia Minor such as Lydia, Armenia,
and Phrygia rise up against Artaxerxes' rule.
Added to this, the Greeks of Sparta were now
aiding the rebels. The writer Diodorus Siculus
writes about the situation the king faced as
the whole empire seemed to rise up in revolt.
The inhabitants of the Asiatic coast revolted from
Persia, and some of the satraps and generals rising
in insurrection made war on Artaxerxes.
At the same time, Tachos, the Egyptian king,
decided to fight the Persians, and prepared
ships and gathered infantry forces. At one
and the same time, he had to fight the Egyptian
king, the Greek cities of Asia, the Spartans,
and the allies of these who had agreed upon making
common cause with them. To quell these rebellions,
the king increasingly relied on the services of
mercenaries, many of them Greeks. Using these
forces, he was able to put down the revolt by 362
BC, but each conflict was ruinously expensive,
and the empire must have felt increasingly fragile
as the decades of the mid 4th century wore on.
His son, Artaxerxes III,
carried on in this vein.
He led one unsuccessful campaign to recapture
Egypt, but managed it on his second try. But
Egypt by that point had had a taste of freedom, and
would never again sit happily within the empire.
Due to their constant rebellions, Artaxerxes III
set about a reign of terror in Egypt, during which
many were killed and temples were destroyed. He
raised taxes there to punishingly cruel amounts,
hoping to impoverish the Egyptians and reduce
their ability to rebel. One Egyptian text
known as the Demotic Chronicle seems to
record this time of hardship and cruelty.
Our lakes and our islands are full of tears.
The houses of the people of Egypt don't have
people to live in them. The Persians will massacre
them. They will take their houses and live there.
They are massacring the people of Egypt while the
sun looks on. The Persian Empire had always ruled
with a degree of compromise and consent from its
subjects, but now that era was coming to an end.
But the end of the Persian Empire
would not come through rebellion.
In the final years of Artaxerxes' reign, he
became concerned about the growing threat of one
northerly Greek kingdom, one that was slowly
gathering power to itself and achieving what
neither Athens nor Sparta had ever been able
to do; the near unification of Greece under
a single king. That power was Macedon, and
the man who ruled it was named Philip.
Macedon had once been a Persian subject. They had
helped King Xerxes during his invasion of Greece,
but after the Persian withdrawal from Europe,
following their defeat at the battle of Plataea,
Macedon was left to its own devices. It had
flourished as a Persian subject, and adopted
elements of the Persian courtly
culture into its royal palaces.
Although they spoke a dialect of Greek
and shared many aspects of Greek culture,
the Macedonians were always considered outsiders
by the Athenians and other southern Greeks. They
looked down on Macedonians as brash and rough, and
were shocked at their seemingly barbarian customs.
They married multiple wives, drank their wine
without watering it down, and rode and hunted
on horseback. In fact, the Macedonian cavalry was
among the most skilled in the region. The king of
Macedon was a man named Philip II. He had become
king at the age of twenty-three at a time when the kingdom
was struggling, faced with numerous powerful Greek
rivals. But over the next decades, he along with
his generals and advisers continued a series
of rapid reforms that led to enormous success.
A key part of this success was Philip's
reforming of the Macedonian army.
For centuries, Greek soldiers had fought in
phalanxes, a formation where they locked their
shields together and formed a bristling wall of
spears. The Greeks had used this formation to
devastating effect on battlefields like Marathonand
Thermopylae. These spears were two to three meters in
length, and since they were longer than the spears
used by the Persians, they had allowed Greek
soldiers a crucial tactical advantage; allowing
multiple lines of men to engage the enemy at once.
Philip's new idea was quite simple; to
make these spears even longer. In fact,
they would be about as long as it was possiblefor
a man to carry, about five to seven meters in length,
as tall as a lamp post. The Roman writer Polybius
describes the formation of these phalanxes.
When the phalanx has its characteristic
virtue and strength, nothing can sustain
its frontal attack or withstand the charge,
for since when it is closed up for action,
the length of the pikes is sixteen cubits. Thus, each
man of the first rank must have the points of
five pikes extending beyond him, each at
a distance of two cubits from the next.
These spears would form a bristling
porcupine that was able to effortlessly
hold enemy troops at bay, and while
the enemy was thus held in place,
the Macedonian heavy cavalry would sweep
into their sides like a hammer on an anvil.
This combination of pike and horse was so
effective that in little more than ten years,
Philip of Macedon was able to conquer
a large area of mainland Greece, and
even defeated the ancient cities
of Athens and Thebes. After that,
he founded an alliance known
as the League of Corinth,
a confederacy of Greek cities that recognized
Macedon and Philip as the ruler of all Greece.
But Philip was not content. He believed that
across the sea, the empire of Persia was now a
weakened edifice. It had expended its strength on
internal rebellions and civil wars, but had also
grown complacent when it came to outside threats.
Their soldiers hadn't fought a battle against
a foreign enemy in decades. Their tactics were
outdated, and their commanders were inexperienced.
Meanwhile, the Macedonians had honed their
skills over years of combat within Greece.
Now, with virtually all Greece united
around him, Philip set his sights on Asia.
Whether King Artaxerxes III would have been
able to meet the disaster that was about to land
on his shores, we will never know, since he
would meet his end in another episode of
Persian court intrigue. In the year 338 BC,
a court eunuch called Bagoas plotted with the
king's physician to poison him. After that, Bagoas
installed the king's youngest son on the throne,
presumably intending to use him as a puppet. But
when the young boy wasn't as pliable as he hoped,
he had him poisoned, too. Then Bagoas installed
a distant relative named Artashiyaata to rule.
This man would take the throne name of Darius
III, and one of his first acts was quite wisely
to have the poisoning eunuch Bagoas killed by
drinking his own poison. Darius was about forty-four
years old when he came to the throne. As a young
man, he had distinguished himself as a warrior,
once killing an enemy on the battlefield in
single combat, and had been awarded by being made
the satrap of Armenia. But his warrior days were
now well behind him, and he had spent the last
years as the head of the empire's postal service,
a distinguished but relatively peaceful position.
He had come to the throne in peculiar and murky
circumstances, and people's faith in his rule
must have been fragile. What Darius III needed was
time, time to shore up loyalty among his satraps,
time to cement his hold on power in the empire,
time to ensure the quality of his fighting forces.
But time was the one thing that Darius didn't
have. That's because on the other side of the sea,
at the same time as the new king Darius was
being crowned, another assassination took place.
In Macedon, in the capital of Aegae,
the Macedonian king Philip II was
celebrating the wedding of one of his daughters.
Diodorus Siculus paints a picture of the scene.
He wanted as many Greeks as possible
to take part in the festivities in
honor of the gods, and so planned brilliant
musical contests and lavish banquets for
his friends and guests. But as the praises
and congratulations of all rang in his ears,
suddenly without warning, the plot against
the king was revealed as death struck.
From the crowd, a man bearing
a dagger stepped forwards.
When Philip directed his attending
friends to proceed him into the theater,
while the guards kept their distance, he saw
that the king was left alone, rushed at him,
pierced him through his ribs, and
stretched him out dead. According
to ancient sources, this man killed Philip
because the king had failed to punish one of
his vassals who had abused him. It was a story of
petty court rivalries and wounded honor, but the
king's young son and heir believed differently.
He believed that his father had been killed by a
trained assassin paid for by their great rivals
across the sea, the Persian Empire and the new
King of Kings, Darius III. Now Philip's Macedonian
Empire and its revolutionary and battle-hardened
army would pass on to his son, whose heart was
filled with rage and thoughts of vengeance,
a young man of about twenty, whose name meant
‘defender of men’, from the Greek ‘alexein’,
to defend, and ‘andros’, men. His name was
Alexandros, but we know him as Alexander.
Just as with previous conquerors like
Cyrus the Great, the life of Alexander
has been pieced together from incomplete
and fragmentary sources, all of them
written down centuries after he was born,
and often far away in the Roman Empire,
although some do draw on earlier
texts that have been lost.
What we do know is that during the first
two years of his reign as King of Macedon,
the young Alexander distinguished himself
for his ruthlessness and brutality.
After the death of Philip, the cities of
southern Greece saw their opportunity for
freedom from Macedonian control.
The city of Thebes broke out in
open rebellion, and Alexander
marched south to crush them.
Alexander had spent much of his youth accompanying
his father on campaign, and he was well-versed in
the Macedonians’ innovative style of warfare. He
captured the city of Thebes and utterly destroyed
it, massacring its population, and selling 30,000
of its people into slavery, as Diodorus of Sicily
recounts. As the slaughter mounted and every
corner of the city was piled high with corpses,
no one could have failed to pity the plight
of the unfortunates. So it was that many
terrible things befell the city. Greeks were
mercilessly slain by Greeks. Relatives were
butchered by their own relatives, and
even a common dialect induced no pity.
The selling of Greeks into slavery was still
considered a great taboo, and it was a clear sign
that Alexander intended to continue ruling
over Greece with an iron fist. In Thebes,
Alexander left only the temples to
the gods standing, and reportedly a
house that had once belonged to
the poet Pindar, whom he admired.
With the rest of Greece now terrified
into line, Alexander set out on what
had been his father's great ambition, a
full-scale invasion of the Persian Empire,
now infused with all the impetuousness of
youth, as Diodoras of Sicily describes.
The king returned with his army to Macedonia,
assembled his military commanders and his
noblest friends, and posed for discussion the
plan for crossing over to Asia. His generals
advised him to produce an heir first, and
then to turn his hand to so ambitious an
enterprise. But Alexander was eager for
action, and opposed to any postponement.
That Alexander was a young man who had never
lost a battle was reason enough for him to be
confident, but all his life he had also been told
that he was descended from the mythical demigod
Heracles through his father's line. He had also
grown up reading the stories of Homer's Iliad,
a story of a great war in the East, and
he was inspired by the story of the great
hero Achilles. All of this combined to make
him a man of singular and remorseless focus.
In spring of 334 BC, Alexander
crossed the Hellespont with
30 to 40,000 of Macedon's best warriors.
When the local Persian satraps heard about the
arrival of this army, they gathered their own
forces, along with a few thousand Greek mercenaries,
and went out to meet him. One Greek general from
Rhodes, a man named Memnon, who, like Themistocles,
had come to Persia to seek his fortune,
acted as an adviser to the western satraps. He
advised the Persians not to fight Alexander with
their inexperienced forces, and instead to adopt
a scorched earth policy, luring his men into the
interior and denying them any food or supplies,
as the Roman period writer Arrian recounts.
Memnon, the Rhodian, advised them not to risk a
conflict with the Macedonians, since they were
far superior to themselves in infantry, and
Alexander was there in person, whereas Darius
was not with them. He advised them to advance
and destroy the fields by trampling them down
under their horses’ hooves, to burn the crops
in the country, and not even to spare the very
cities. For then, Alexander will not be able
to stay in the land from lack of provisions.
The Persians, understandably reluctant
to burn their own people's property,
refused. They met Alexander in
battle at the Granicus River,
and there his experienced Macedonian spearmen
and hardened cavalry smashed the Persian force.
Alexander allowed the Persian army to leave the
battlefield, but the Greek mercenaries who had
fought on the Persian side he treated
with exceptional severity as traitors,
as Arrian recounts. He soon completely
surrounded them and cut them up so that
none of them escaped, except such as might have
concealed themselves among the dead bodies.
From there he conquered all
the way through Asia Minor,
capturing Greek cities like Ephesus, Miletus,
and Herodotus' hometown of Halicarnassus.
The Persians likely assumed
that he would stop there,
interested only in liberating the Greek-speaking
regions of the empire, but to their dismay,
Alexander kept going. In autumn of 333 BC, he
marched through the Cilician gates and down
into the region of Syria. Distraught, the Persian
king Darius III now marched to meet Alexander.
He was able to surprise the Macedonian,
sweeping down on the rear of his ranks at
a wide plain near a place called Issus,
now on the Syrian border with Turkey.
Alexander swung around to prevent being
cut off, and the armies came together.
At first, the Persians had great success. Darius
had brought with him a large number of Greek
mercenaries, perhaps as many as 12,000 men, and
these fared well against the Macedonians. But at
a crucial moment in the battle, Alexander made a
daring and impetuous gamble. He rode at the head
of his cavalry and led them in a desperate charge
directly at Darius himself, ensconced in his royal
bodyguard. It was a dangerous and unorthodox
move. Darius, seeing that he was the target
of this charge, withdrew to a safer position,
but this withdrawal began a domino effect among
the Persian lines. The historian Arrian recounts
what happened next. The Persians did not give way
until they perceived that Darius had fled. Then
at last there ensued a decided flight, and on all
sides. The horses of the Persians suffered
much injury in the retreat, and the horsemen
themselves, being so many in number and retreating
in panicked terror without any regard to order along
narrow roads, were trampled on and injured no
less by each other than by the pursuing enemy.
The battle was a disaster. Darius barely escaped
with his life, and the Persian army was scattered
in all directions. As a final devastating blow,
Alexander swept into Darius' camp and captured
the women of his court; his mother, his wives,
and concubines. Humiliated and eager to plead
for the safe return of his family, Darius sent an
envoy to Alexander, but the Macedonian refused to
free the court women, and sent back the
following reply to the Persian king.
Your ancestors invaded Macedonia and the rest
of Greece, and did us harm although we are not
done you any previous injury. I have been
appointed commander and chief of the Greeks,
and it is with the aim of punishing the
Persians that I have crossed into Asia.
To many Greeks, this may have
appeared somewhat hypocritical,
since Alexander himself had invaded much of Greece
alongside his father and had burned Thebes,
one of its most ancient cities, to the ground.
Still, Alexander's list of accusations went on.
My father died at the hands of
conspirators instigated by you.
You sent unfriendly letters to the Greeks about
me to push them to war against me, and sent money
to the Spartans and some other Greeks. But now I
have defeated in battle first your generals and
satraps, and now you in person in your army, and
by the grace of the gods I control the country.
Approach me therefore as the lord of all Asia. If
you wish to lay claim to the title of king, then
stand your ground and fight for it. Do not take to
flight, as I shall pursue you wherever you may be.
From there, Alexander marched through
Palestine, conquering cities as he went.
He besieged the Phoenician island city
of Tyre, which held out for seven months,
after which he ordered its population to
be massacred and 2,000 of its defenders
to be crucified along the shoreline for daring to
hold out against him. This was an exceptionally
brutal act by Greek standards, and few Persian
kings had ever used such a gruesome spectacle.
In the town of Gaza, Alexander also slaughtered
every one of the 10,000 men in the city, and
sold the women and children into slavery. When
the Persian commander refused to kneel to him,
Alexander ordered that he be dragged behind
a horse until he died, a punishment likely
inspired by Homer's Iliad, in which Achilles
drags the Trojan hero Hector behind his chariot.
From there he marched into Egypt. There,
sources claim that he was welcomed with
open arms since the relationship between
Egypt and Persia had soured so much in the
preceding decades, but really, the Egyptians
had little choice. They had been largely
disarmed after their recent rebellions, and
Alexander had made clear in Tyre and Gaza that
he was willing to take revenge against
civilian populations who resisted him.
In 332 BC, Alexander was crowned pharaoh in
Memphis nearly two hundred years after
Cyrus the Great's son, Cambyses.
After the wounding loss at Issus, Darius III
retreated to Babylon, and there began to gather
an even more massive army. Seemingly as a ploy
to buy time, Darius sent Alexander an envoy,
offering to surrender the western half of the
empire, everything beyond the river Euphrates
to Alexander. But the Macedonian refused,
repeating once again that he was now king
of all Asia, and that soon all of Darius' empire
would be his. The final decisive clash would occur
in 331 BC, when Alexander set out again for
Mesopotamia to confront Darius III for good.
On the 20th of September, ten days before
the battle, the Babylonian Astronomical
Diaries record that an apocalyptic sign
appeared in the heavens just after sunset.
On the 13th day of the month of Ululu, in the
fifth year of Darius, there was an eclipse
of the moon, which was entirely darkened as
Jupiter set. Saturn was four fingers distant.
As the eclipse became total, a westerly wind
was blowing. As the moon became visible again,
an easterly wind arose. During the
eclipse, there were deaths and plagues.
For the Macedonians, this celestial
event was an omen of victory,
a sign that a great empire would soon
also be eclipsed. But for the Persians,
the event was an omen of doom. The two armies met
at a small village named Gaugamela on the banks of
the river Bumodus, near to modern-day Erbil in
northern Iraq, on the 1st of October 331 BC.
During the battle that followed,
despite being outnumbered, Alexander once
again prevailed, and Darius fled East.
Now completely unopposed, Alexander marched to
Babylon, and the great city surrendered without
a fight. He entered through the great Ishtar
Gate and down the processional way in triumph.
The Roman period writer Curtius
Rufus describes this moment.
Alexander put himself at the head of his
column, which he formed into a square, and
ordered his men to advance into the city as if
they were going into battle. A large number of
the Babylonians had taken up a position on the
walls, eager to have a view of their new king,
but most went out to meet him. They had carpeted
the whole road with flowers and garlands, and set
up at intervals on both sides silver altars
heaped not just with frankincense but with
all manner of perfumes; herds of cattle and
horses, and lions, too, and leopards carried along
in cages. Next came the Magi chanting a song
in their native fashion, and also musicians.
Alexander and his men were astonished at the
sight of Babylon, by far the largest, wealthiest,
and most well-developed city they had ever seen.
It was the city itself, with its beauty and
antiquity, that commanded the attention not
only of the king but of all the Macedonians.
Its wall is ten meters wide, and it is said that two
chariots meeting on it can safely pass each
other. The two parts of the city are connected
by a stone bridge over the river, and this is
also reckoned among the wonders of the East.
The Macedonians, who had grown up in the
hardy mountains of northern Greece, were
greatly affected by the sights of the
sophisticated and wealthy Persian Empire,
and found Persian influences already taking
hold of them, as Diodorus of Sicily recounts,.
Alexander began to imitate the Persian luxury
and the extravagant display of the kings of Asia.
He put on the Persian diadem and dressed
himself in the white robe and the Persian
sash and everything else except the trousers and
the long-sleeved upper garment. He distributed
to his companions cloaks with purple borders,
and dressed the horses in Persian harness.
Others feared that Alexander was less overcoming
Persia and more being overcome by it, as the
Roman historian Curtius Rufus remarks. In the
whole camp, the feeling and the talk of all
was that more had been lost by victory than had
been gained by war; that they themselves were
conquered men when they had surrendered
themselves to alien and foreign habits.
While Alexander reveled in his
victory and tried on new clothes,
the Persian Emperor Darius fled ever
further eastwards up into the Iranian
plateau. There, he hoped to gather another
army to stop the relentless advance of the
Macedonians. And around him, the
Persian Empire began to collapse.
After a month's stay in Babylon, around
November 331 BC, Alexander set out in pursuit.
The fine Persian roads, dotted with wells,
waystations, and supply depots, had once been the
empire's great strength, but now they became
a liability. Alexander and his men advanced
rapidly along these highways, and were soon
at the foothills of the Zagros Mountains,
the only obstacle now standing between
them and the capital of Persepolis.
There, in a remarkable echo
of the Battle of Thermopylae,
a Persian army under the command
of Ariobarzanes, the satrap of Parsa,
staged a heroic defense in the mouth of
a narrow pass called the Persian Gates.
The Persians held this pass for a full month,
during which time Alexander's soldiers were
brought to a standstill and suffered heavy
losses. But just as Xerxes had 150 years earlier,
the Macedonians eventually found a narrow
path through the mountains, and were able
to surround the Persian defenders. The
path to the Persian capital was now open.
In late January of 330 BC, four years after he had
landed in Asia, Alexander and his men arrived in
Persepolis. The Greek writer Diodorus of Sicily
recounts the fine city that Alexander found.
It was the richest city under the sun, and
the private houses had been furnished with
every sort of wealth over the years. Many
of the houses belong to the common people,
and were abundantly supplied with
furniture and wearing apparel of
every kind. The citadel is a noteworthy
one, and is surrounded by a triple wall.
Scattered about the royal terrace were residences
of the kings and quarters for the great generals,
all luxuriously furnished, and buildings
suitably made for guarding the royal treasure.
Perhaps in retribution for holding
out so long at the Persian Gates,
Alexander ordered his soldiers to treat the people
of Persepolis much like those of Tyre and Gaza.
They slaughtered all the men and enslaved all
the women. The palace they looted with impunity.
Archaeology shows that they tore through
the halls of Persepolis in haste, ripping
gold ornaments from the walls, and leaving
much behind scattered on the flagstones.
Much of the fine stone tableware and everything
else too heavy to take with them, they simply
smashed on the floor. After picking the palace
clean of every gold object they could carry,
either deliberately or as a drunken accident,
according to some sources, Alexander then burned
down the royal palace of the great king and
much of the city around it. The flames would
have been visible for miles, and a great column of
black smoke would have climbed into the sky. The
thick cedar rafters of the 100 columned halls
would have smoldered and finally fallen in.
The gold looted from the treasuries
of Persepolis supposedly weighed 120,000
talents, or nearly 4,000 tons. The Macedonians
needed thousands of camels to carry it away.
This gold had been the treasury of the
empire that kept its well-oiled machine
running, and in looting it, Alexander had
ripped the heart out of the Achaemenid system.
Next, Alexander marched to Pasargadae,
where he briefly stopped at the
tomb of Cyrus the Great, as Strabo describes.
Alexander then went to Pasargadae, and this, too, was
an ancient royal residence. Here he saw also in a
park the tomb of Cyrus. It was a small tower and
was concealed within the dense growth of trees.
He passed through the entrance and saw a golden
couch, a table with cups, a golden coffin,
and numerous garments and ornaments set
with precious stones, and that he saw all
these things on his first visit, but that
on a later visit, the place had been robbed
and everything had been carried off, and that the
robbers had removed the corpse to another place.
If this is true, then it's clear that Persian
royal authority had by that point completely
collapsed. From there, Alexander continued to
pursue Darius high up into the Iranian plateau,
chasing him a distance of more than a thousand
kilometers across the winding roads of the Eastern
Empire, but he would not catch him. Darius
III was eventually murdered by his own satrap,
a man named Bessus, high in the hills near Ecbatana.
Bessus would name himself the new Achaemenid king,
even taking the royal name Artaxerxes V, and
intending to raise an army in the eastern province
of Bactria. But by this time, he controlled
only the easternmost quadrant of the empire,
and his time would be short. Eventually Bessus was
captured, and Alexander, perhaps enraged that he had
robbed him of the joy of killing Darius himself,
ordered the treacherous general to be flogged,
mutilated, and finally killed in an ostentatious
display of cruelty. With the death of Bessus,
Persia was now completely in the hands
of Alexander, but his men were exhausted,
and it's clear that Alexander was beginning to
lose touch with reality. In his escapade across
the collapsing empire, he had met with little
resistance, and he had begun to believe that he
could conquer the entire world, as one anecdote
related in Plutarch's Moralia illustrates.
It is reported that King Alexander the
Great, hearing Anaxarchus, the philosopher,
discoursing that there were infinite worlds,
fell a weeping. “Have I not good cause to weep?”
quoth he, “that being as there are an infinite
number of worlds, I'm not yet the lord of one?”
Finally, Alexander reached the
easternmost border of the empire
that he had destroyed, and even then, he wanted
to keep on conquering. With the Himalayan
mountains rising blue in the far distance,
he led an expedition into the Punjab in Northern
India, and here the adventure came to an end.
Alexander's men were by that point used to
facing the scattered remnants of Persian
resistance, but the moment they left
the old empire, they faced the strong
independent kingdoms of India, and Alexander's
forces struggled, as Plutarch recounts.
The combat in India was of a more mixed
kind, but maintained with such obstinacy
that it was not decided ‘til the eighth
hour of the day. As for the Macedonians,
this struggle blunted their courage and
stayed their further advance into India,
for they were told that the kings of India
were awaiting them with 80,000 horsemen,
200,000 footmen, 8,000 chariots,
and 6,000 fighting elephants.
While Alexander may have styled himself
as the lord of all Asia, in reality,
he had only defeated a single power, the
Achaemenid Empire, and inherited its ruins.
Alexander eventually listened to reason and agreed
to turn back. On the return journey to Babylon,
for unknown reasons, Alexander declined to use the
well-worn Persian road that led inland, and instead
ordered his men to march through a waste known
as the Gedrosian Desert, now in modern Pakistan.
Some sources claim he did this in order to punish
his men for refusing to continue on into India,
whereas others say he wanted to complete another
glorious exploit like his ancestor Heracles to
add to his growing legend. Either way, the route
was a disaster, as the writer Arrian describes.
The blazing heat and the lack of water caused
innumerable casualties; of thirst or from the
effects of the deep, burning, sun-baked sand.
Sometimes they met with lofty hills of sand,
loose, deep sand into which they sank as if
it were mud or untrodden snow. The mules and
horses suffered even greater distress from the
uneven and treacherous surface of the track.
It was perhaps at this moment that
Alexander might have realized the debt he
owed to the Persian road-builders who
had made his eastward journey so easy.
The fact that they never knew when they would
find water made regular, normal marches impossible.
Casualties among the animals were very numerous.
Often they were killed deliberately by the men,
who butchered the mules and horses whenever
supplies gave out, and then ate their flesh.
It was only through a stroke of luck that
the army was able to find the sea coast, and
followed it west out of the desert and towardshome.
By some reports, three-quarters of Alexander's men
died on this stretch of the journey. In the
Gedrosian Desert, Alexander may have realized
that it wasn't so easy conquering when someone
hadn't already done most of the work for you.
But what had Alexander conquered? It was an
empire that he had no hope of successfully
administrating, an empire made up of people who
didn't speak his language, held together by an
administrative regime he didn't understand, and
by the promise of Persian safety, stability, and
gold. Alexander didn't have any heirs since he had
left home as a young man and spent his whole adult
life chasing glory across Asia. When he returned
to Babylon in April of 323 BC, weakened and
exhausted from his journey across the Gedrosian
Desert, Alexander didn't have long left to live.
Our story began in the city of Babylon, with its
rebellion against the Assyrian Empire, and it's
in this city that our story will also end. In
June, just two months after returning to Babylon,
Alexander sickened and died, refusing to
name a successor. The territory that had
once been the Persian Empire, the largest
and wealthiest the world had ever known,
was carved up among his generals. These
generals and their descendants would spend
the next two hundred years fighting amongst
one another, as Diodorus of Sicily recalls.
When he was quitting life in Babylon,
and that his last breath was asked by
his friends to whom he was leaving the
kingdom, he said, "To the best man,
for I foresee that a great combat of
my friends will be my funeral games."
This actually happened, for
after the death of Alexander,
the foremost of his friends quarreled about
the primacy and joined in many great combats.
With these wars, the descendants of the Macedonian
conquerors would try to put back together what
they had broken to reunify an empire that had
ruled in stability for more than two centuries,
but none of them would succeed. Before long, the
Achaemenid Persian Empire was all but forgotten,
except as the villains in the stories that the
Greeks still told themselves in their streets
and theaters. The language of Old Persian would
gradually pass out of use, along with the use of
cuneiform, and as the centuries went by, people
forgot how to read the inscriptions still carved
into the palaces and pillars, into the stones and
cliff faces of the Iranian mountains. The empires
that followed, the Cassenians and the Parthians,
drew their lineages back to a mythical Iranian
heritage, but the legacy of the Achaemenids
was remembered only in the tiniest fragments.
While some Achaemenid cities like Susa and Ecbatana
continued to be important population centers in
later periods, others saw a more rapid
decline. The garden city of Pasargadae,
always more of a royal complex than a true city,
was rapidly abandoned. Its blooming parkland would
have overgrown with scrub and weeds, its water
channels filled with silt and finally stopped
working entirely. Its imported trees and
shrubs would have died, and before long,
the once paradise of the Persian kings would
have blown away with the loose layer of top soil.
The blackened ruin of the palaces at Persepolis
would stand for some time over the city, and
over the following centuries it would decline
steadily. Eventually it was little more than a
village, and then the people left entirely.
Sand and earth would soon blow over the
slowly crumbling stones of the palace that still
bore the following inscription. King of Kings,
king of countries containing many kinds of
men, king in this great earth far and wide.
In 1906, the American scholar of
Iranian languages, A.V. Williams Jackson,
traveled through Persia and visited
the site of Pasargadae. There, he wrote
the following description of its
wasted and melancholy appearance.
Pasargadae and Persepolis are sad themes, for
both are silent cities of a dead past. Cyrus
and Darius still remain in effigy of stone, and
the vestiges of royal halls, untenanted for
more than 2,000 years, bear witness to the
departed splendor of a period of grandeur.
To Jackson, the ruins appeared as reminders of the
fearsome power of time. Here ruin reigns supreme,
and even the tombs that housed the bodies of
the dead kings have been crumbling for ages.
Time's relentless touch has worn
away the clear-cut features of
these monuments and destroyed the beauty
of their lineaments, yet they still endure
to mark daily by their shadows the advance
of centuries across the dial of eternity.
Williams Jackson also visited
the tomb of Cyrus the Great.
He even stepped inside its inner chamber, but
what he found disappointed him. The condition
of the royal chamber is not what it once was.
Innumerable graffiti cover the walls; but most
inharmonious of all, for it hung all over the
place where the body must have lain, was a cord
with an incongruous collection of worthless trash
in the way of votive offerings; a piece of rag,
a bit of brass, a fragment of a lamp, a bell, a
copper ring, and whatnot made up the motley string.
He turned to leave, but as he did, for a moment,
the ancient power of the site
reasserted itself, and for a moment,
he felt connected to the monumental nature
of the history that had happened here.
As I slowly descended the deep steps and mounted
my horse, the sun sank low behind the western
hills. I turned for a last look at the historic
shrine. A vision seemed to rise before my view,
and I saw in fancy the scene of the last rites of
the great king. I still could hear the tramplings
of the horses that led the funeral train. The
measured tread of the soldiers in clanking
armor rang dully on my ear, and the chanting
voice of the Magian priest intoning perchance
the Zoroastrian psalm ‘Kam nemoi zaam’, ‘to what land am
I going?’ beat rhythmically through my brain. Then the
shroud of darkness fell like a pall upon the plain,
and the moon rose slowly over the distant hills.
The Athenian playwright Aeschylus fought the
Persians for much of his life. He had been
a hoplite at the battle of Marathon when he
was around thirty-five years old, and fought again
ten years later at the sea battle of Salamis,
and the final decisive confrontation of
Platea. He would be remembered to history as
the father of Greek tragedy and the writer
of more than seventy plays, of which only
seven have survived. But when he died,
he wanted to be remembered not for his
writing, but for the part he had played
on the battlefield. On his gravestone, he
asked that the following inscription be left.
Beneath this stone lies Aeschylus, son of
Euphorion the Athenian, who perished in the
wheat-bearing land of Gela. Of his noble
prowess the grove of Marathon can speak,
and the long-haired Persian knows it well.
But despite his pride in the part he had
taken in these battles, Aeschylus also knew
the horrors of war. While his plays glorified
Greek victories, they also gave voice to his
Persian enemies and asked his audience to
extend the hand of humanity to the Persian
men who had died on the beaches and in the fields
of Greece for the vanity of kings. In his play
The Persians, he offers a kind of lament
for all those who had died in these wars.
This lament now stands as a kind of epitaph
for the entire Persian Empire, as its palaces
stood in ruins, its peoples scattered, and
the sun finally set on the Achaemenid world.
True guardians are we of many a temple rich in
gold and holy, whom our lord and king, for age and
honor has extolled to watch his land forlorn.
For all the strength of Asia born, like hounds
at a young master's horn, baying, away has flown,
and now for long no royal post comes, no rider
from the host; back to great Persia's throne
from Agbatan, from Susa tall, from ancient Kissia’s
guarded wall, we saw the horse and chariot go, the
gliding ships, the footmen slow; so has the flower
of Persia's youth departed, and in fierce
longing full many a wife and mother staying,
waiting as day still follows day,
and dread the lengthening delay.
Therefore does my spirit mourn, robed in darkness,
racked with fear. Lest a cry the people hear; “Woe, woe;
woe for Persia's host forlorn,” ringing through
the wide, empty streets of Susa's lonely land.
Thank you once again for listening to the Fall
of Civilizations podcast. I'd like to thank my
voice actors for this episode, Michael Hajiantonis,
Alexandra Boulton, Simon Jackson, Tom Marshall-Lee,
Chris Harvey, Jack Jacobs, Nick Denton, Amrit
Sandhu, Paul Casselle, Tim Stephenson, and Ameen
Taher. Readings in Old Persian were performed by
Dr. Mateen M. Arghandehpour; in Spanish by Scott Fins.
Readings in Greek were performed by Dimitris
Chavres. Singing of the Zoroastrian Gathas
was performed by Ardalan. The theme music is
Home at Last by John Bartmann. Sound design
was by Alexey Sibikin. I'd also like to thank my
historical adviser for this episode, Dr. Mateen
M. Arghandehpour at the University of Oxford.
A full list of sources will be available as a link in
the podcast and video description. I love to hear
your thoughts and responses on social media, so
please come and tell me what you thought. You
can find me on Instagram at Paul MM Cooper, and
on Blue Sky at paulmmcooper.com. If you'd like
updates about the podcast and announcements
about new episodes, you can follow the podcast
on Blue Sky at fallofcivilizations.com. This
podcast can only keep going with the support of
our generous subscribers on Patreon. You keep
me running and help me to cover my costs. You
also let me dedicate more time to researching,
writing, recording, and editing to get the
episodes out to you faster and bring as much
life and detail to them as possible. As
a thank-you, all subscribers are able to
listen to Fall of Civilizations completely ad-free,
and watch all video episodes also ad-free. I want
to thank all my subscribers for making this
show possible. If you enjoyed this episode,
please consider heading on to patreon.com/fallof
civilizations_podcast, or just Google ‘Fall of
Civilizations Patreon’. That's P-A-T-R-E-O-N.
For now, all the best, and thanks for listening.